
Antimemetics
1. Invisible Choices, Made by Default
2. Self-Keeping Secrets
3. Prospecting for Conceptual Holes
4. The Technique Taboo
5. Antimemes
6. Confabulation
7. The Ineﬃcient Market Hypothesis
8. Evading Mind Control
9. The Economics of Media
10. Media Bias
11. We should not raise awareness

Invisible Choices, Made by Default
There are two popular language learning software platforms: Anki and Duolingo. Anki
is hard, free and eﬀective. Duolingo is easy, commercial and ineﬀective.
The number of Duolingo users far outstrips the number of Anki users. Duolingo has 8
million downloads on the Play Store. Anki has 40 thousand. So there are 200 Duolingo
users for every Anki user[1]. If you ask a random language learner what software to
use they'll probably suggest Duolingo. If you ask a random successful language
learner what software to use they'll probably suggest Anki. Most language learners are
unsuccessful.
It should be no surprise that most language learners use an ineﬀective product.
Learning a language is hard. Duolingo is designed to attract as many customers as it
can. Therefore Duolingo must be easy to use. Anki is designed to work. Therefore Anki
must be hard to use[2]. Eﬀectiveness and mass-adoption are mutually exclusive.
On average, you'll have to ask 200 language learners what software they use before
one of them tells you about Anki. In practice, you are unlikely to stumble across Anki
at all. You can only ﬁnd out about Anki if you go looking for it and you'll only
go looking for it if you already know it exists.
No one ever told me about most of the software I use. Usually I'll infer that it must
exist and then go looking for it. This is how I discovered qutebrowser, Spacemacs,
tmux, i3 and—of course—Anki.
This principle isn't limited to open source software. Everything I've ever taken
seriously exhibits a similar pattern. There's a common way most people do it and
there's a cheaper, better, skill-intensive way a tiny minority do it.
Minority opinions are inherently controversial. Here are a few (relatively)
uncontroversal examples to illustrate the trend:
Vim keybindings vs. conventional hotkeys
Lisps vs. programming languages without syntactic macros
Good history books vs. the news
Powerlifting vs. popular exercise de jour
Tiling window managers vs. the desktop metaphor
If you disagree with one of the examples above that's okay but I won't reply to you in
the comments.
I don't mind choosing to be part of the majority. I watch mainstream movies. I eat at
popular restaurants. I perform the oldest magic tricks in the book. I'm okay with these
choices I know about.
I make most of my choices unknowingly, by default, from the options presented to me.
Most of the time I pick Duolingo over Anki without ever knowing I've made a
choice.
1. I'm ignoring the Anki desktop app, the med student userbase, the paywalling of
the iPhone Anki app and diﬀerences in churn to simplify this example and

because I don't have the relevant numbers. ↩ 
2. I mean that eﬀective spaced repetition is inherently diﬃcult. The Anki
onboarding experience could be improved without loss of utility. ↩ 

Self-Keeping Secrets
A magician never reveals his secrets.
The secret behind nearly every magic trick ever performed is available at your local
library. Magicial secrets stay secret because they're inconsequential. Unless you are a
magician or aspire to become one, you have better things to learn than magic tricks. If
magic tricks did anything that mattered then they wouldn't be magic tricks. They'd be
technology.
Magicians don't need a conspiracy to keep our tricks secret. It takes work to learn how
to do magic. Friction and inertia are suﬃcient to keep out the riﬀraﬀ.
This is true of more important subjects too, like computer security. Though zero-day
exploits themselves are precious secrets, "how to ﬁnd" zero-days is public knowledge.
And since zero-day exploits have a limited shelf-life it's "how to ﬁnd" zero-days that
matters.
Three may keep a secret, if two of them are dead.
―Benjamin Franklin
Organizations leak like a sponge. Organizations can keep passwords secret most of
the time only because a good authentication system is easy to reset. If you're even
the slightest bit concerned that your passwords have been stolen then you can re-
randomize them. Similarly, an intelligence agency maintains its stockpile of zero-day
exploits by constantly replenishing them. To an organization, "preserving secrecy"
really means "restoring secrecy". Techniques can't be kept secret because they
change too infrequently to restore secrecy after they get stolen.
In practice, organizations face the opposite problem: not enough knowledge is widely-
known. Training people is so hard that the limiting factor of an organization's size is
how many skilled employees it can hire. The bigger your organization gets the more
it'll suﬀer a regression to the mean. Scaling a company is an exercise in dumbing
down your employees' jobs to counteract the regression to the mean.
Large organizations can neither keep knowledge secret nor spread it around. In other
words, a dependence on smart people of any kind inhibits the growth of an
organization. An organization can scale to the extent it makes its employees'—and
especially its customers'—intelligence unnecessary.
SCP-055 is a "self-keeping secret" or "anti-meme".
―internal document, SCP Foundation
The largest organizations are precisely those that make knowledge the most obsolete.
The public school system is, by headcount, among the largest organizations in modern
civilization. It must therefore, by necessity, minimize the need for students to learn
anything hard[1].
Most adults are employed by large companies. Most adults buy most of our products
from large companies. Small businesses are dying out[2]. Modern civilization is
increasingly dominated by large organizations. These organizations don't just shape

our society. They are our society. We are our jobs. We are the products we use. We are
the media we consume. We are our communities.
Our most popular activities are those that scale the best. Those that scale the best are
those that require the least thinking, the least skill, the least specialized knowledge,
the least individuality. If you want to measure your individuality, ask yourself this: of
all the things you do, how much of it is so hard your friends and coworkers literally
can't do it.
1. By "hard" I mean "conceptual". Schools can eﬀectively force students to learn by
rote. However, as a coercive institution, any school with mandatory attendance
is deﬁnitionally incapable of forcing students to productively misbehave or
otherwise exercise critical thinking. (Except to oppose the institution itself.) ↩ 
2. Small operations that concentrate a lot of talent in a tiny number of employees
are doing well. These companies will continue to constitute an insigniﬁcant
fraction of total employment. ↩ 

Prospecting for Conceptual Holes
Imagine you wanted to explore the number line. You start at 1 and then you explore 2,
3, 4 and so on. No matter how long you do this you'll never discover −1, , 2π, ∞, i, or
a single noncomputable number. That's because the most interesting numbers are
precisely those located in directions conceptually orthogonal to whatever numbers
you've already explored.
The easiest concepts to learn are the ideas ahead of you on a path you're already
taking. If you know classical mechanics then it's straightforward to learn relativity. You
could crack turbulence without ever changing ﬁelds.
The second-easiest things to learn are those outside your specialization but inside of
your culture's intellectual tradition. If you grew up in the West then you know there
are such things as physics and painting even if you never learned how to do them.
The second-hardest things to learn are those outside your society's intellectual
tradition. Consider for example kenshō[1]. It's possible to live an entire lifetime outside
of Japan without ever discovering that such a concept exists. Westerners don't choose
not to experience kenshō. This choice is made invisibly.
The hardest things to learn are those belonging to domains of knowledge which
haven't been (openly) conceptualized anywhere, such as photography before the
invention of the camera. This category includes zero-day exploits.
We can number each kind of conceptual hole from least to most orthogonal.
Type 1: Concepts you are aware of but do not understand.
Type 2: Concepts you are not aware of, but which belong to a ﬁeld you are aware
of.
Type 3: Fields of knowledge you do not know exist, but which exist.
Type 4: Fields of knowledge that remain genuinely secret or have not been
invented.
Expertise is about mastering one ﬁeld, but general intelligence is how prepared you
are for something new. The more diﬀerent kinds of concepts you understand the
better you will be at solving new kinds of problems. This is behind the principle of
learning that breadth of knowledge equals breadth of transference.
Filling holes of Type 1 is how you build expertise in a ﬁeld. Holes of Types 2-4 are
better for building broader (and therefore more transferable) knowledge. In other
words, holes of greater-numbered types are better for increasing your general
intelligence. If this is your goal then holes of Type 2 and 3 are the most valuable.
I ﬁnd holes of Type 3 to be so valuable that just knowing where they are improves my
creativity at solving problems. (It also turns them into holes of Type 2.) You can ﬁnd
holes of Type 3 systematically by mastering the language of a suﬃciently foreign
culture. I know this works with written Chinese and spoken Pirahã. I hypothesize it's
also true of Arabic, ASL, Korean and the Khoisan languages.
12

Filling holes of Type 2 is almost straightforward. Pick anything you're bad at that lots of
other people do and develop a basic competence. This turns holes of Type 2 into holes
of Type 1.
Holes of Type 4 can be individually very valuable. That is, a single hole of Type 4 can
earn you lots of power and money. But holes of Type 4 are so hard to ﬁnd, verify and
exploit that you can't build a broad base of knowledge out of them.
I like collecting conceptual holes, especially those of Types 2 and 3. They're so
interesting. Whenever I discover a new hole it opens up an entire tree of knowledge
orthogonal to everything I used to know.
1. Kenshō (Japanese kanji: ⾒性) is a subjective state of mind associated with Zen
meditation. ↩ 

The Technique Taboo
For a strange few decades that may just be starting to end, if you went to art school
you'd be ostracised by your teachers for trying to draw good representational art.
"Representational art" means pictures that look like real things. Art school actively
discouraged students from getting better at drawing.
"Getting better at drawing" is oﬀ-topic at my weekly local drawing club too. I've
literally never heard it discussed.
This taboo extends far beyond art. My nearest gym forbids weightlifters from using
electronic systems to log their progress. I'm friends with programmers who can't touch
type. None of them use Vim macros.
"I have sometimes suspected that the quickest way to get worried looks from
many modern Western meditation teachers is to talk about practice in a way that
implies the attempt to actually master anything." — Daniel M. Ingram
In the part of the United States where I live, the subject of skill is often taboo. Not just
relative diﬀerences in skill level between speciﬁc present individuals (which would
make sense). The implicit acknowledgement of skill as a trainable attribute is
taboo.
Not all professions have this issue. Math is still math. Biology is still biology. One can
politely discuss a cook's cooking. Magicians respect coin manipulation like it's 1904.
But when traditional colleges supply the labor force for a professional trade outside of
academia, that's when discussion of skill (especially rote learning) becomes taboo[1].
College students learn everything about their trade except how to do it. Then we
maintain a collective silence concerning technique.
A Chinese major teaches you how to talk about Chinese, not how to read it.
An English major teaches you how to talk about novels, not how to write one.
An art major teaches you how to talk about masterpieces, not how to create
one.
A Computer Science Engineering major...well, you get the idea.
That's a partial explanation, but it doesn't explain why skill diﬀerences in weightlifting
and meditation are also taboo.
Societies make taboo exactly those topics whose mere discussion threatens the
precarious dominance of those at the top of the social order by drawing attention to
the system's internal contradictions.
I think my society is hiding something from itself.
1. Medical school is an exception to this pattern. This may be because medical
school considers itself a form of technical training, to be undergone after
acquiring a liberal undergraduate education. ↩ 

Antimemes
Antimemes are self-keeping secrets. You can only perceive an antimeme if you already
know it's there. Antimemes don't need a conspiracy to stay hidden because you can't
comprehend an antimeme just by being told it exists. You can shout them to the
heavens and nobody will listen. I'll try to explain with a ﬁctitious example.
Suppose we all had an invisible organ behind our ears and our brains kept it secret
from our consciousness. If I told you "you have an invisible organ behind your ear" you
wouldn't believe me. You'd only believe it exists if you deduced its existence from a
trail of evidence.
You can deduce the existence of an antimeme from the outline of the hole it cuts in
reality. If you ﬁnd an old photo with a gap where a person has been painted out then
you can be conﬁdent that someone has been disappeared. You can then ﬁgure out
who it is with conventional investigative methods. The challenge is noticing the gap in
the ﬁrst place and then not dismissing it as noise.
Diﬀerent cultures have diﬀerent antimemes. The more diﬀerent two cultures are from
each other the less their antimemes overlap. You can sweep up a mountain of
antimemes just by reading a Chinese or Arabic history of civilization and comparing it
to Western world history. You can snag a diﬀerent set by learning what it was like to
live in a hunter-gatherer or pastoralist society.
You can do the same thing with technology. Developing a proﬁciency in Lisp will
shatter your tolerance of inferior programming languages. Once you've internalized
defmacro you can never go back.
As for jobs: once an entrepreneur, always an entrepreneur[1].
Comprehending an antimeme takes work. You slog toward it for a long time and then
eventually something clicks like a ratchet. Until then everything you've learned is
reversible. After it clicks you've permanently unlocked a new level of experience, like
stream entry.
Stream entry is another antimeme, by the way.
Antimemes are easily dismissed as pseudoscience. Pseudoscience is a meme, not an
antimeme. You can distinguish antimemes from pseudoscience at a glance by
examining why they're suppressed. Pseudoscience is dismissed as fraudulent.
Antimemes are dismissed as inapposite.
1. There are two diﬀerent kinds of entrepreneurship. The more common form of
entrepreneurship is self-employment where you sell your labor. I'm not talking
about this common entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship where you exploit an
overlooked market opportunity is an antimeme. ↩ 

Confabulation
When someone asks me why I did or said something I usually lie because the truthful
answer is "I don't know". I literally don't know why I make >99% of my decisions. I
think through none of these decisions rationally. It's usually some mixture of gut
instinct, intuition, cultural norms, common sense and my emotional state at the time.
Instead, I make up a rational-sounding answer on the spot. Even when writing a
mathematical proof I'll start with an answer and then rationalize it post hoc. If I'm
unusual it's because I knowingly confabulate. Most humans unknowingly confabulate.
This is well-established through studies of split-brained patients, Anton's syndrome,
Capgras' syndrome and choice blindness.
Confabulation is lazy evaluation. At the end of the day it's more important to be less
wrong than more rational. Confabulation is cheaper and faster than reason. If you can
confabulate the right behavior then you should confabulate instead of reasoning.
Confabulation becomes a problem when you misconstrue it for reason. A long time
ago I wanted to understand Christianity so I asked a Christian a series of "why"
questions the way I'd ask a physicist. His answers became increasingly confabulated
until he eventually accused me of attacking him. I have stayed friends with another
Christian from the same church who simply declares "I don't know".
Mathematics is a unique ﬁeld because if you put any two mathematicians in a room
with a mountain of stationary then they will eventually agree on what they can and
can't prove. This is performed by confabulating smaller and smaller inductive leaps
until they're all reduced to trivialities.
We perform a less rigorous form of proof writing when we rationally explain a decision.
Rationality is best rationed to points of disagreement. Lazy evaluation is adequate for
the vast swathes of human agreement. In this way reason and confabulation coexist
mutualistically. One cannot exist without the other. Together they constitute
rationality.
Which brings us to antimemes.
Antimemes are self-keeping secrets. Occasionally you'll stumble upon one by
accident. When this happens you'll unconsciously shy away from it the way your eyes
drift from the building next to the Leaky Cauldron to the one on the other side.
Normally this is the end of things. You move on and forget about it. Your mind stitches
over the antimeme the same way it stitches over your blind spots. But if someone else
draws your attention to the antimeme then you will emit series of confabulations.
Saying things makes you believe them. Just thinking you said something (even when
you didn't) makes you believe it. The more confabulations you state to protect an
antimeme the harder it becomes for you to detect it. You're digging yourself deeper
into a conceptual hole. It is therefore imperative to short-circuit antimemetic
confabulation as early as you can.
How do you distinguish antimemetic confabulations from the rationally symbiotic
kind?

Unlike good confabulations, antimemetic confabulations will make you increasingly
uncomfortable. You might even get angry. The distractions feel like being in the brain
of a beginner meditator or distractible writer. They make you want to look away.
You can recognize this pattern as an antimemetic signature. People love explaining
things. If you feel uncomfortable showing oﬀ your knowledge it's probably because
you have something to hide.
Once you've identiﬁed antimemetic confabulation all you have to do is set your ego
aside, admit ignorance and methodically sift through the data. You'll ﬁnd it eventually.

The Ineﬃcient Market Hypothesis
The eﬃcient-market hypothesis (EMH) is the idea that there are no hundred-dollar bills
lying on the sidewalk because someone smarter than you would have picked them up
by now. The EMH is a good tool for most people.
If you're smart enough then you should reverse this advice into "There are hundred-
dollar bills lying on the sidewalk". If you are a genius then you should reverse it to the
extreme. "There are hundred-dollar bills[1] lying around all over the place."
Hundred-dollar bills lying on the sidewalk are called "alpha". Alpha is a tautologically
self-keeping secret. You can't read about it in books. You can't ﬁnd it on blogs[2]. You
will never be taught about it in school. "You can only ﬁnd out about [alpha] if you go
looking for it and you'll only go looking for it if you already know it exists."
Where should you look?
Abstractions
A system is only as secure as its weakest link. Cracking a system tends to happen on
an overlooked layer of abstraction[3].
It's easier to install a keylogger than to break a good cryptographic protocol.
It's easier to disassemble a computer and read the hard drive directly[4] than to
crack someone's password.
The best attacks (those requiring the least work) happen on an separate dimension of
orthogonality entirely.
The easiest way to talk to someone powerful is just to call zir company and ask
by ﬁrst name[5].
Won't this technique stop working now that Tim Ferris has published it in a bestselling
book? Not necessarily. Quantum mechanics has been public knowledge for decades
yet most people can't do it. The hard part of pickpocketing isn't ﬁnding pockets to
pick.
Perhaps you don't need to talk to anyone rich and powerful. That is a good problem to
have.
I think you should ﬁnd a problem that's easy for you to solve. Optimizing in
solution-space is familiar and straightforward, but you can make enormous gains
playing around in problem-space.
― What Startups Are Really Like by Paul Graham
Problem-space tends to have higher dimensionality than solution space.
Case study

According to Joel Spolsky, the best programmers have the ability "to think in
abstractions, and, most importantly, to view a problem at several levels of abstraction
simultaneously." Also according to Joel Spolsky, a business is an "abstraction [that]
exists solely to create the illusion that the daily activities of a programmer (design and
writing code, checking in code, debugging, etc.) are all that it takes to create software
products and bring them to market."
The ideal programmer employee is someone who can see all the way down to the
level of bits, yet can't raise zir head high enough to manipulate the ﬁnancial
machinery of venture capital.
Homework assignment: How can you harvest alpha from this local equilibrium?
How to tell when you get it right
Alpha often feels like a magic trick. You know the phrase "A magician never reveals his
secrets"? Magic secrets are not secret. The Magician's Oath is not real. David
Copperﬁeld patents his inventions[6]. You can look them up in a public government
registry. You don't because magical secrets are boring. Disappointingly so.
Magicians cheat. The purest alpha should feel like cheating too. The greatest
compliment you can receive about your alpha source isn't "You're a genius." It's "That
shouldn't be possible. I'm disillusioned to live in a world is so ineﬃcient."
Of course, you should never hear either response because you should never ﬂaunt
these discoveries in the ﬁrst place.
1. A month ago I oﬀered to put Westerners in touch with an N95 mask exporter in
China. Only two readers took the eﬀort to message me about it. One of them
couldn't be bothered to use WeChat. ↩ 
2. Actually, I did ﬁnd alpha on a blog post once. The tutorial has since been taken
down. ↩ 
3. For practice, check out What is the fastest you can sort a list of ints in Java? ↩ 
4. Most computers are not encrypted. Professional software engineers are
consistenly surprised by my ability to recover ﬁles from a broken laptop without
their login information. ↩ 
5. Tim Ferris claims this works. I am inclined to believe him based on the guests
who have attended his podcast. ↩ 
6. Edit: I can only ﬁnd one patent invented by David Copperﬁeld, patent number
9017177/9358477. Most of his patentable illusions seem to be invented by other
people. ↩ 

Evading Mind Control
A couple days ago I surveyed readers for deviant beliefs. The results were funny,
hateful, boring and bonkers. One of the submissions might even be useful.
If you care a lot about your mind, it is not unreasonable to avoid advertisements
like plague rats, up to and including muting your speakers and averting your gaze.
This extremist position caught my eye because humans have a tendency to
underestimate the eﬀect advertising[1] has on us. I never realized how much
advertising aﬀected me until I got rid of it.
For nearly a year I have been avoiding junk media. I thought this would make me
happier, healthier and more productive—which it has—but the most surprising eﬀect
is how much the reduction in advertising aﬀects my behavior.
When I give up junk media, I stop thinking about politics, videogames and celebrities. I
think less about products in general. Important things eventually expand to ﬁll this
void. But for the ﬁrst week or so, my head just feels empty.
Tim Ferris doesn't just avoid news, television and social media. He even avoids
reading books—especially nonﬁction. When I ﬁrst read that, I thought he was an Eloi.
Having blogged regularly for the past year myself, I now sympathize with him.
If you are young then you should read lots of books because you need to amass
information. Eventually you hit diminishing returns. Reading more books ﬁlls fewer
conceptual holes per unit time invested.
You cannot discover new knowledge for humanity by reading a book written by a
human.
But there is a bigger problem. It is easy to look up answers to common questions in a
book. It is harder to look up answers to esoteric questions. It is impossible to look up
answers to open problems. The diﬃculty of looking up important things you don't
know answers to increases the more low-hanging fruit you pick from the Tree of
Knowledge.
As your power waxes, it becomes easier to invent answers to your own questions.
Eventually the trajectories cross. It becomes easier to ﬁgure things out yourself than
to look up the answer. The comparative value of reading books goes negative. Books,
once guides, become reference material. It is more eﬃcient to write your own book
than to read someone else's.
I used to read a lot of books. I ﬁnished 18 books in the ﬁrst 4.5 months of 2020.
Date
Title
Author
Page
Count
January 1
The Trouble with Physics
Lee Smolin
392
January 17 My Side of the Street
Jason DeSena Trennert 224
January 19 Saints & Sinners
William L. Hamilton
145
January 20 The Quants
Scott Patterson
352

Date
Title
Author
Page
Count
February
21
Harry Potter and the Methods of
Rationality
Eliezer Yudkowsky
N/A
February
22
The Vital Question
Nick Lane
368
February
24
The Last Leonardo
Ben Lewis
384
March 4
Mastering Manga with Mark Crilley
Mark Crilley
128
March 22
World War Z
Max Brooks
342
March 29
The Nature of Plants
Craig Huegel
228
March 31
Built not Born
Tom Golisano, Mike
Wicks
224
April 13
A First-Class Catastrophe
Diana B. Henriques
416
April 21
The Plant Messiah
Carlos Magdalena
238
April 22
The 4-Hour Workweek
Tim Ferris
308
April 27
The War on Normal People
Andrew Yang
304
May 1
Seeing Like a State
James C. Scott
445
May 5
Botany for Gardeners 3rd Edition
Brian Capon
240
May 15
The $12 Million Stuﬀed Shark
Don Thompson
272
Then I...stopped. In the 6.3 months since mid-May I ﬁnished only 3 books.
Date
Title
Author
Page Count
July 2
Human Diversity Charles Murray 528
August 4
The Actor's Life
Jeanna Fischer 252
November 2 Lost Connections Johann Hari
322
May of this year appears to be when I hit my inﬂection point where writing became
more useful than reading.
When I started writing, I thought it was a substitute for socializing. I now realize it is a
substitute for reading. Writing is to reading what entrepreneurship is to having a job.
Reading too much (compared to what you write) turns you into a sheep.
1. In this sense, "advertising" includes not only paid adverts like banner ads but
also self-replicating propaganda ("we should raise awareness of..."), grassroots
advertising (videogame streamers, artiﬁcial communities) and all information
derived from a press release. I care about whether an interest group is getting a
message into my head. Neither I nor the interest group cares how it gets there.
↩ 

The Economics of Media
When I was a kid I thought the news came from "investigative reporters" like Clark
Kent were who were paid to research stories. Since then, I have gotten my startup on
national television, placed a press release into the world news, discussed biological
warfare as a podcast guest, written a blog which has been reposted to Hacker News,
written fanﬁction which has been linked to on Reddit and read a lot of books. My
understanding of the media ecosystem has become more nuanced.
Media Economics
Small fry like Lyle McDonald, the McKays and Bruce Schneier can scrape by by selling
books, branded paraphernalia and other niche merchandise. Niche merchandise
doesn't scale. Large megacorp news outlets generally rely on subscriptions and
advertising for their core revenue.
Subscriptions and advertising scale linearly with the number of viewers. But the cost
of distributing Internet[1] media is negligible. An article costs the same to write
whether one person reads it or one million. The market equilibrium is one where the
great masses of people get our information from a tiny number of sources.
What people do with the information doesn't much aﬀect a media outlet's bottom line.
Whether the information makes people angry or happy doesn't matter except to the
extent anger and happiness aﬀect readership. Whether the information promotes
good policy doesn't matter at all—unless that policy directly aﬀects the news industry.
Content is fungible. Financially, what matters is how many people consume it.
Minimizing Costs
I learned a lot about Twitter when I hosted the 2020 Less Wrong Darwin Game. I wrote
a sequence 11,475 words. It dwarfed anything else I had ever written until then
because...I barely had to write anything. The story was created Vanilla_cabs and other
competitors. Reporters report on Twitter tweets for the same reason: because content
is fungible and because rehashing tweets is a cheap way to mass produce news.
But there's an even easier way to generate content: Let someone else do it for you.
Media businesses convert content into money. Media businesses don't care about the
content's secondary eﬀects. The cheaper media businesses can acquire content the
more money they can earn. Non-media business with products to sell want media
attention. Non-media businesses proﬁt only oﬀ of contents' secondary eﬀects. These
are the perfect conditions for symbiosis. If a non-media business can write a news
story for a news outlet then the news outlet gets free content and the business gets
free advertising. This kind of news story is called a "press release". The ﬁrst time I got
a press release posted in a major news outlet I was stunned by how little the press
release had been edited. The press release was basically copied word-for-word as
original content.

Political organizations, including governments, create press releases the same way
companies do, except their objective is political rather than commercial.
Press releases have the same economics as news stories because press releases are
news stories. Only large organizations (or startups with large aspirations) have the
economics to support press releases. Small organizations don't have comparable
economies of scale. The press release system therefore constitutes a emergent
pressure toward centralization. I suspect this pressure is related to how national
politics increasingly dominate the political dialogue in the USA.
Cleaning out your head
Most of the mainstream news is implicitly subsidized by large organizations who are
trying to get you to buy their products and ideologies. How do you ﬁght back against
mind control?
The ﬁrst step is to disconnect from the news. News makes you stupid.
The second step is to explore in orthogonal directions. Learn calculus and
physics. Learn foreign languages. Learn the histories of China and Islam (unless
you are Chinese and/or Muslim in which case you should check out The History
of Rome). Learn to read palms and Tarot cards[2]. Learn to draw. Use this
knowledge to start hard ambitious original projects like companies. The more
your actions deviate from the default script the more holes you'll discover in the
Matrix.
The third step is to create your own media. If you are consuming media created
by another person—even if that person is George Orwell—then you are not yet
thinking for yourself.
1. Paper media had a worse calculus based around monopolizing distribution. Risk-
adverse paper monopolies distributed only the most inoﬀensive content. ↩ 
2. But don't take them too seriously. ↩ 

Media Bias
In the days following conﬁrmed person-to-person transmission of COVID in the United
States, my company went on Fox News to promote ourselves. What makes this
otherwise bog-standard collusion between business and media interesting is our
representative was a Marxist who knew COVID would be a disaster for the United
States. Our story was used to support Fox News' thesis that the entrepreneurial spirit
of America's small businesses would crush COVID. In exchange we received media
coverage which helped us sell product. Everyone won.
A common misconception about propaganda is the idea it comes from deliberate lies
(on the part of media outlets) or from money changing hands. In my personal
experience colluding with the media no money changes hands and no (deliberate) lies
are told by the media itself. Lying and corruption on the part of media outlets tends to
be unnecessary in all but the most extreme cases (like North Korea). Most media bias
actually takes the form of selective reporting.
Selective Reporting
Investigative reporting costs money. Media outlets' job is primarily curation i.e.
republishing information from others in the know. "Others in the know" is mostly
companies with products to sell and political parties with ideologies to sell. The
cheapest information to access is public datasets (like NOAA weather reports), public
records (like Florida state records), public drama (Twitter) and press releases. Press
releases are the best because you don't have to write your own article.
News outlets cannot report everything. If you report only some of the available
information then your choice of what to report reﬂects your bias. Bias and curation are
two sides of the same coin. You cannot curate information without imposing bias.
Curating information is the imposition of a bias. Combine the Chinese Robbers Fallacy
with a large pool of uncurated data and you can ﬁnd facts to support any plausible
thesis. Lest you think this is a partisan problem, check out this hatchet job by the New
York Times and compare it to the reality.
The fact news outlets don't have to broadcast lies doesn't mean they don't.
Quotes
News outlets don't have direct access information like what the military is doing. The
military does. Militaries lie. If a newspaper says Colonel Kurtz says air strikes don't kill
noncombatants then the newspaper is not lying even though they are broadcasting a
lie. Even when a news outlet is broadcasting a lie, their government is unlikely to
prosecute them for promoting oﬃcial government policy. Newspapers abnegate
responsibility for truth by quoting oﬃcial sources. You get away (legally) straight-up
lying about medical facts if you are quoting the CDC.
News outlets' unquestioning reliance on oﬃcial sources comes from the economics of
their situation. It is cheaper to republish oﬃcial statements without questioning them.
The news outlet which produces the cheapest news outcompetes outlets with higher

expenditure. Besides, it is rarely a good idea to antagonize the government against
you—even in a democracy. If you antagonize the government then they might stop
feeding you press releases about the wars they're winning. (Noam Chomsky writes
about this dynamic ad nauseam in Manufacturing Consent.)
This is true even for small independent operations. It's rare for podcast hosts to argue
with their guests. This isn't necessarily unethical. The number of people who dislike
you is dominated by the size of your audience, not by how wrong you are. If you have
a large audience then people will call you wrong all the time and the right thing to do
is ignore them. This applies to both hosts and guests. If an adversary invites you onto
their show it is because they think the exchange will net beneﬁt their platform.
If your adversary's evaluation is correct then you should decline unless you are
playing a non-zero-sum game (in which case you are not true adversaries). The parity
inverse of a meme is the same meme—at a diﬀerent phase in its lifecycle. Two-sided
conﬂicts are extremely virulent memes because they co-opt potential enemies.
Debugging Attention
When thinking about things scientiﬁcally, it is helpful to ask yourself "What do you
think you know and why do you think you know it?" Media bias is not a game of
science. It is a game of memetics. Memetics isn't about truth. It is about attention. Ask
yourself "What are you thinking about and why are you thinking about it?"

We should not raise awareness
The phrase "we should raise awareness about x" creeps me out. I had trouble
identifying exactly why until I read this summary of simulacra levels.
Level 1: "There's a lion across the river." = There's a lion across the river.
Level 2: "There's a lion across the river." = I don't want to go (or have other
people go) across the river.
Level 3: "There's a lion across the river." = I'm with the popular kids who are too
cool to go across the river.
Level 4: "There's a lion across the river." = A ﬁrm stance against trans-river
expansionism focus grouped well with undecided voters in my constituency.
Level 1 states truth about reality. Level 2 manipulates reality. Level 3 states truth
about social reality. Level 4 manipulates social reality.
The transition from Level 1 to Level 2 is trading truth for deception. The
transcendence from Level 2 to Level 3 trades physical reality for social reality—an
abstraction. The transcendence from Level 3 to Level 4 is trades social truth for social
deception.
"We should raise awareness about x" jumps all the way up to level 10.
Everything below this line is my own invention and does not correspond to standard
usage of simulacra levels.
Level 5 and Level 6 (Media Creation)
If you want to manipulate people on a grand scale then you must transcend to an
even higher abstraction: the media. "The media" is just what we call the target of the
masses' attention. Media must be interesting if it is to catch the masses' attention
eﬃciently. Level 5 is about genuine interestingness. Level 6 is about creating the
appearance of interestingness.
Level 5 (news): "There's a lion across the river." = Lions and rivers are
interesting.
Level 6 (clickbait): "There's a lion across the river." = Clickbait with the word
"lion" in the title maximizes ad revenue for my news outlet.
Levels 5 and 6 are no longer even about getting people on your side (social reality).
They are about generating attention for your information delivery system. (The
attention can later be commoditized.) Levels 5 and 6 are the realm of reality TV
stardom. These levels are about creating channels and brands. The next level is about
manipulating channels and brands.

Level 7 and Level 8 (Media
Manipulation)
In English, we often use diﬀerent words for traditional advertising, native advertising,
press releases and propaganda. These distinctions matter if you are an ethical
reporter. The distinctions are irrelevant to someone who needs to disseminate a
message. Since I am an entrepreneur, not a reporter, I use the word "advertising" to
mean "calling public attention to one's product, service, need, etc." instead of "paid
announcements"[1].
Many people have the idea that news companies send reporters to carefully verify
facts. Actually, news outlets usually just republish press releases with a few edits[2].
Even live interviews usually ask predictable softball questions. Interest groups write
news and news outlets publish it. Any news outlet which doesn't let advertisers
subsidize its stories has trouble competing with competitors who do.
Level 7 (press releases): "There's a lion across the river." = This press release
was written by a company selling boats and big game riﬂes.
Level 8 (propaganda): "There's a lion across the river." = The Zebra Party owns
your communication infrastructure.
Level 9 and Level 10 (Pure Memetics)
Memes are often created by people, usually people with speciﬁc interests. Once
released, memes self-replicating. They mutate and are selected. They evolve.
We started with facts. Then moved up to alliances. Then media. Then propaganda. As
memes evolve, they separate from human interests. No longer does the meme
manifest a human being's intention. The meme is trying (in the Darwinian sense of the
word "trying") to survive and replicate.
Level 9: "There's a lion across the river." = The sentence "There's a lion across
the river." has high memetic ﬁtness.
Level 10: "We should raise awareness of lions on the other side of the river." =
The "There's a lion across the river." meme is trying to mind control you so it can
replicate.
1. Both of these deﬁnitions come from Dictionary.com. ↩ 
2. My understanding of media manipulation comes from historical precedent
combined with my ﬁrsthand experience. For example, I started a company with
a press release so good the editor of TechCrunch used it as a case study in how
to write press releases. ↩ 

