
Argument and Analysis
1. Eight Short Studies On Excuses
2. Schelling fences on slippery slopes
3. Intellectual Hipsters and Meta-Contrarianism
4. Cardiologists and Chinese Robbers
5. All Debates Are Bravery Debates
6. The Virtue of Silence
7. Proving Too Much
8. Beware Isolated Demands For Rigor
9. Transhumanist Fables
10. ...And I Show You How Deep The Rabbit Hole Goes

Eight Short Studies On Excuses
The Clumsy Game-Player
You and a partner are playing an Iterated Prisoner's Dilemma. Both of you have
publicly pre-committed to the tit-for-tat strategy. By iteration 5, you're going happily
along, raking up the bonuses of cooperation, when your partner unexpectedly presses
the "defect" button.
"Uh, sorry," says your partner. "My ﬁnger slipped."
"I still have to punish you just in case," you say. "I'm going to defect next turn, and
we'll see how you like it."
"Well," said your partner, "knowing that, I guess I'll defect next turn too, and we'll both
lose out. But hey, it was just a slipped ﬁnger. By not trusting me, you're costing us
both the beneﬁts of one turn of cooperation."
"True", you respond "but if I don't do it, you'll feel free to defect whenever you feel like
it, using the 'ﬁnger slipped' excuse."
"How about this?" proposes your partner. "I promise to take extra care that my ﬁnger
won't slip again. You promise that if my ﬁnger does slip again, you will punish me
terribly, defecting for a bunch of turns. That way, we trust each other again, and we
can still get the beneﬁts of cooperation next turn."
You don't believe that your partner's ﬁnger really slipped, not for an instant. But the
plan still seems like a good one. You accept the deal, and you continue cooperating
until the experimenter ends the game.
After the game, you wonder what went wrong, and whether you could have played
better. You decide that there was no better way to deal with your partner's "ﬁnger-slip"
- after all, the plan you enacted gave you maximum possible utility under the
circumstances. But you wish that you'd pre-committed, at the beginning, to saying
"and I will punish ﬁnger slips equally to deliberate defections, so make sure you're
careful."
 
The Lazy Student
You are a perfectly utilitarian school teacher, who attaches exactly the same weight to
others' welfare as to your own. You have to have the reports of all ﬁfty students in
your class ready by the time midterm grades go out on January 1st. You don't want to
have to work during Christmas vacation, so you set a deadline that all reports must be
in by December 15th or you won't grade them and the students will fail the class. Oh,
and your class is Economics 101, and as part of a class project all your students have
to behave as selﬁsh utility-maximizing agents for the year.
It costs your students 0 utility to turn in the report on time, but they gain +1 utility by
turning it in late (they enjoy procrastinating). It costs you 0 utility to grade a report
turned in before December 15th, but -30 utility to grade one after December 15th.

And students get 0 utility from having their reports graded on time, but get -100 utility
from having a report marked incomplete and failing the class.
If you say "There's no penalty for turning in your report after deadline," then the
students will procrastinate and turn in their reports late, for a total of +50 utility (1 per
student times ﬁfty students). You will have to grade all ﬁfty reports during Christmas
break, for a total of - 1500 utility (-30 per report times ﬁfty reports). Total utility is
-1450.
So instead you say "If you don't turn in your report on time, I won't grade it." All
students calculate the cost of being late, which is +1 utility from procrastinating and
-100 from failing the class, and turn in their reports on time. You get all reports graded
before Christmas, no students fail the class, and total utility loss is zero. Yay!
Or else - one student comes to you the day after deadline and says "Sorry, I was really
tired yesterday, so I really didn't want to come all the way here to hand in my report. I
expect you'll grade my report anyway, because I know you to be a perfect utilitarian,
and you'd rather take the -30 utility hit to yourself than take the -100 utility hit to me."
You respond "Sorry, but if I let you get away with this, all the other students will turn in
their reports late in the summer." She says "Tell you what - our school has procedures
for changing a student's previously given grade. If I ever do this again, or if I ever tell
anyone else about this, you can change my grade to a fail. Now you know that passing
me this one time won't aﬀect anything in the future. It certainly can't aﬀect the past.
So you have no reason not to do it." You believe her when she says she'll never tell,
but you say "You made this argument because you believed me to be the sort of
person who would accept it. In order to prevent other people from making the same
argument, I have to be the sort of person who wouldn't accept it. To that end, I'm
going to not accept your argument."
The Grieving Student
A second student comes to you and says "Sorry I didn't turn in my report yesterday.
My mother died the other day, and I wanted to go to her funeral."
You say "Like all economics professors, I have no soul, and so am unable to
sympathize with your loss. Unless you can make an argument that would apply to all
rational actors in my position, I can't grant you an extension."
She says "If you did grant this extension, it wouldn't encourage other students to turn
in their reports late. The other students would just say 'She got an extension because
her mother died'. They know they won't get extensions unless they kill their own
mothers, and even economics students aren't that evil. Further, if you don't grant the
extension, it won't help you get more reports in on time. Any student would rather
attend her mother's funeral than pass a course, so you won't be successfully
motivating anyone else to turn in their reports early."
You think for a while, decide she's right, and grant her an extension on her report.
The Sports Fan
A third student comes to you and says "Sorry I didn't turn in my report yesterday. The
Bears' big game was on, and as I've told you before, I'm a huge Bears fan. But don't
worry! It's very rare that there's a game on this important, and not many students
here are sports fans anyway. You'll probably never see a student with this exact

excuse again. So in a way, it's not that diﬀerent from the student here just before me,
the one whose mother died."
You respond "It may be true that very few people will be able to say both that they're
huge Bears fans, and that there's a big Bears game on the day before the report
comes due. But by accepting your excuse, I establish a precedent of accepting
excuses that are approximately this good. And there are many other excuses
approximately as good as yours. Maybe someone's a big soap opera fan, and the
season ﬁnale is on the night before the deadline. Maybe someone loves rock music,
and there's a big rock concert on. Maybe someone's brother is in town that week.
Practically anyone can come up with an excuse as good as yours, so if I accept your
late report, I have to accept everyone's.
"The student who was here before you, that's diﬀerent. We, as a society, already have
an ordering in which a family member's funeral is one of the most important things
around. By accepting her excuse, I'm establishing a precedent of accepting any
excuse approximately that good, but almost no one will ever have an excuse that
good. Maybe a few people who are really sick, someone struggling with a divorce or a
breakup, that kind of thing. Not the hordes of people who will be coming to me if I give
you your exemption.
The Murderous Husband
You are the husband of a wonderful and beautiful lady whom you love very much - and
whom you just found in bed with another man. In a rage, you take your hardcover
copy of Introduction To Game Theory and knock him over the head with it, killing him
instantly (it's a pretty big book).
At the murder trial, you plead to the judge to let you go free. "Society needs to lock up
murderers, as a general rule. After all, they are dangerous people who cannot be
allowed to walk free. However, I only killed that man because he was having an aﬀair
with my wife. In my place, anyone would have done the same. So the crime has no
bearing on how likely I am to murder someone else. I'm not a risk to anyone who isn't
having an aﬀair with my wife, and after this incident I plan to divorce and live the rest
of my days a bachelor. Therefore, you have no need to deter me from future murders,
and can safely let me go free."
The judge responds: "You make a convincing argument, and I believe that you will
never kill anyone else in the future. However, other people will one day be in the
position you were in, where they walk in on their wives having an aﬀair. Society needs
to have a credible pre-commitment to punishing them if they succumb to their rage, in
order to deter them from murder."
"No," you say, "I understand your reasoning, but it won't work. If you've never walked
in on your wife having an aﬀair, you can't possibly understand the rage. No matter
how bad the deterrent was, you'd still kill the guy."
"Hm," says the judge. "I'm afraid I just can't believe anyone could ever be quite that
irrational. But I see where you're coming from. I'll give you a lighter sentence."
 
The Bellicose Dictator

You are the dictator of East Examplestan, a banana republic subsisting oﬀ its main
import, high quality hypothetical scenarios. You've always had it in for your ancestral
enemy, West Examplestan, but the UN has made it clear that any country in your
region that aggressively invades a neighbor will be severely punished with sanctions
and possible enforced "regime change." So you decide to leave the West alone for the
time being.
One day, a few West Examplestanis unintentionally wander over your unmarked
border while prospecting for new scenario mines. You immediately declare it a "hostile
incursion" by "West Examplestani spies", declare war, and take the Western capital in
a sneak attack.
The next day, Ban Ki-moon is on the phone, and he sounds angry. "I thought we at the
UN had made it perfectly clear that countries can't just invade each other anymore!"
"But didn't you read our propaganda mouthpi...ahem, oﬃcial newspaper? We didn't
just invade. We were responding to Western aggression!"
"Balderdash!" says the Secretary-General. "Those were a couple of lost prospectors,
and you know it!"
"Well," you say. "Let's consider your options. The UN needs to make a credible pre-
commitment to punish aggressive countries, or everyone will invade their weaker
neighbors. And you've got to follow through on your threats, or else the pre-
commitment won't be credible anymore. But you don't actually like following through
on your threats. Invading rogue states will kill a lot of people on both sides and be
politically unpopular, and sanctions will hurt your economy and lead to heart-rending
images of children starving. What you'd really like to do is let us oﬀ, but in a way that
doesn't make other countries think they'll get oﬀ too.
"Luckily, we can make a credible story that we were following international law. Sure,
it may have been stupid of us to mistake a few prospectors for an invasion, but there's
no international law against being stupid. If you dismiss us as simply misled, you don't
have to go through the trouble of punishing us, and other countries won't think they
can get away with anything.
"Nor do you need to live in fear of us doing something like this again. We've already
demonstrated that we won't go to war without a casus belli. If other countries can
refrain from giving us one, they have nothing to fear."
Ban Ki-moon doesn't believe your story, but the countries that would bear the
economic brunt of the sanctions and regime change decide they believe it just enough
to stay uninvolved.
The Peyote-Popping Native
You are the governor of a state with a large Native American population. You have
banned all mind-altering drugs, with the honorable exceptions of alcohol, tobacco,
caﬀeine, and several others, because you are a red-blooded American who believes
that they would drive teenagers to commit crimes.
A representative of the state Native population comes to you and says: "Our people
have used peyote religiously for hundreds of years. During this time, we haven't
become addicted or committed any crimes. Please grant us a religious exemption
under the First Amendment to continue practicing our ancient rituals." You agree.

A leader of your state's atheist community breaks into your oﬃce via the ventilation
systems (because seriously, how else is an atheist leader going to get access to a
state governor?) and says: "As an atheist, I am oﬀended that you grant exemptions to
your anti-peyote law for religious reasons, but not for, say, recreational reasons. This
is unfair discrimination in favor of religion. The same is true of laws that say Sikhs can
wear turbans in school to show support for God, but my son can't wear a baseball cap
in school to show support for the Yankees. Or laws that say Muslims can get time oﬀ
state jobs to pray ﬁve times a day, but I can't get time oﬀ my state job for a cigarette
break. Or laws that say state functions will include special kosher meals for Jews, but
not special pasta meals for people who really like pasta."
You respond "Although my policies may seem to be saying religion is more important
than other potential reasons for breaking a rule, one can make a non-religious case
justifying them. One important feature of major world religions is that their rituals
have been ﬁxed for hundreds of years. Allowing people to break laws for religious
reasons makes religious people very happy, but does not weaken the laws. After all,
we all know the few areas in which the laws of the major US religions as they are
currently practiced conﬂict with secular law, and none of them are big deals. So the
general principle 'I will allow people to break laws if it is necessary to established and
well-known religious rituals" is relatively low-risk and makes people happy without
threatening the concept of law in general. But the general principle 'I will allow people
to break laws for recreational reasons' is very high risk, because it's suﬃcient
justiﬁcation for almost anyone breaking any law."
"I would love to be able to serve everyone the exact meal they most wanted at state
dinners. But if I took your request for pasta because you liked pasta, I would have to
follow the general principle of giving everyone the meal they most like, which would
be prohibitively expensive. By giving Jews kosher meals, I can satisfy a certain
particularly strong preference without being forced to satisfy anyone else's."
The Well-Disguised Atheist
The next day, the atheist leader comes in again. This time, he is wearing a false
mustache and sombrero. "I represent the Church of Driving 50 In A 30 Mile Per Hour
Zone," he says. "For our members, going at least twenty miles per hour over the
speed limit is considered a sacrament. Please grant us a religious exemption to traﬃc
laws."
You decide to play along. "How long has your religion existed, and how many people
do you have?" you ask.
"Not very long, and not very many people," he responds.
"I see," you say. "In that case, you're a cult, and not a religion at all. Sorry, we don't
deal with cults."
"What, exactly, is the diﬀerence between a cult and a religion?"
"The diﬀerence is that cults have been formed recently enough, and are small enough,
that we are suspicious of them existing for the purpose of taking advantage of the
special place we give religion. Granting an exemption for your cult would challenge
the credibility of our pre-commitment to punish people who break the law, because it
would mean anyone who wants to break a law could just found a cult dedicated to it."
"How can my cult become a real religion that deserves legal beneﬁts?"

"You'd have to become old enough and respectable enough that it becomes
implausible that it was created for the purpose of taking advantage of the law."
"That sounds like a lot of work."
"Alternatively, you could try writing awful science ﬁction novels and hiring a ton of
lawyers. I hear that also works these days."
Conclusion
In all these stories, the ﬁrst party wants to credibly pre-commit to a rule, but also has
incentives to forgive other people's deviations from the rule. The second party breaks
the rules, but comes up with an excuse for why its infraction should be forgiven.
The ﬁrst party's response is based not only on whether the person's excuse is
believable, not even on whether the person's excuse is morally valid, but on whether
the excuse can be accepted without straining the credibility of their previous pre-
commitment.
The general principle is that by accepting an excuse, a rule-maker is also committing
themselves to accepting all equally good excuses in the future. There are some
exceptions - accepting an excuse in private but making sure no one else ever knows,
accepting an excuse once with the express condition that you will never accept any
other excuses - but to some degree these are devil's bargains, as anyone who can
predict you will do this can take advantage of you.
These stories give an idea of excuses diﬀerent from the one our society likes to think
it uses, namely that it accepts only excuses that are true and that reﬂect well upon
the character of the person giving the excuse. I'm not saying that the common idea of
excuses doesn't have value - but I think the game theory view also has some truth to
it. I also think the game theoretic view can be useful in cases where the common view
fails. It can inform cases in law, international diplomacy, and politics where a tool
somewhat stronger than the easily-muddled common view is helpful.

Schelling fences on slippery slopes
Slippery slopes are themselves a slippery concept. Imagine trying to explain them to
an alien: 
"Well, we right-thinking people are quite sure that the Holocaust happened, so
banning Holocaust denial would shut up some crackpots and improve the discourse.
But it's one step on the road to things like banning unpopular political positions or
religions, and we right-thinking people oppose that, so we won't ban Holocaust
denial."
And the alien might well respond: "But you could just ban Holocaust denial, but not
ban unpopular political positions or religions. Then you right-thinking people get the
thing you want, but not the thing you don't want."
This post is about some of the replies you might give the alien.
Abandoning the Power of Choice
This is the boring one without any philosophical insight that gets mentioned only for
completeness' sake. In this reply, giving up a certain point risks losing the ability to
decide whether or not to give up other points.
For example, if people gave up the right to privacy and allowed the government to
monitor all phone calls, online communications, and public places, then if someone
launched a military coup, it would be very diﬃcult to resist them because there would
be no way to secretly organize a rebellion. This is also brought up in arguments about
gun control a lot.
I'm not sure this is properly thought of as a slippery slope argument at all. It seems to
be a more straightforward "Don't give up useful tools for ﬁghting tyranny" argument.
The Legend of Murder-Gandhi
Previously on Less Wrong's The Adventures of Murder-Gandhi: Gandhi is oﬀered a pill
that will turn him into an unstoppable murderer. He refuses to take it, because in his
current incarnation as a paciﬁst, he doesn't want others to die, and he knows that
would be a consequence of taking the pill. Even if we oﬀered him $1 million to take
the pill, his abhorrence of violence would lead him to refuse.
But suppose we oﬀered Gandhi $1 million to take a diﬀerent pill: one which would
decrease his reluctance to murder by 1%. This sounds like a pretty good deal. Even a
person with 1% less reluctance to murder than Gandhi is still pretty paciﬁst and not
likely to go killing anybody. And he could donate the money to his favorite charity and
perhaps save some lives. Gandhi accepts the oﬀer.
Now we iterate the process: every time Gandhi takes the 1%-more-likely-to-murder-
pill, we oﬀer him another $1 million to take the same pill again.
Maybe original Gandhi, upon sober contemplation, would decide to accept $5 million
to become 5% less reluctant to murder. Maybe 95% of his original paciﬁsm is the only
level at which he can be absolutely sure that he will still pursue his paciﬁst ideals.

Unfortunately, original Gandhi isn't the one making the choice of whether or not to
take the 6th pill. 95%-Gandhi is. And 95% Gandhi doesn't care quite as much about
paciﬁsm as original Gandhi did. He still doesn't want to become a murderer, but it
wouldn't be a disaster if he were just 90% as reluctant as original Gandhi, that stuck-
up goody-goody.
What if there were a general principle that each Gandhi was comfortable with Gandhis
5% more murderous than himself, but no more? Original Gandhi would start taking the
pills, hoping to get down to 95%, but 95%-Gandhi would start taking ﬁve more, hoping
to get down to 90%, and so on until he's rampaging through the streets of Delhi,
killing everything in sight.
Now we're tempted to say Gandhi shouldn't even take the ﬁrst pill. But this also
seems odd. Are we really saying Gandhi shouldn't take what's basically a free million
dollars to turn himself into 99%-Gandhi, who might well be nearly indistinguishable in
his actions from the original?
Maybe Gandhi's best option is to "fence oﬀ" an area of the slippery slope by
establishing a Schelling point - an arbitrary point that takes on special value as a
dividing line. If he can hold himself to the precommitment, he can maximize his
winnings. For example, original Gandhi could swear a mighty oath to take only ﬁve
pills - or if he didn't trust even his own legendary virtue, he could give all his most
valuable possessions to a friend and tell the friend to destroy them if he took more
than ﬁve pills. This would commit his future self to stick to the 95% boundary (even
though that future self is itching to try to the same precommitment strategy to stick to
its own 90% boundary).
Real slippery slopes will resemble this example if, each time we change the rules, we
also end up changing our opinion about how the rules should be changed. For
example, I think the Catholic Church may be working oﬀ a theory of "If we give up this
traditional practice, people will lose respect for tradition and want to give up even
more traditional practices, and so on."
Slippery Hyperbolic Discounting
One evening, I start playing Sid Meier's Civilization (IV, if you're wondering - V is
terrible). I have work tomorrow, so I want to stop and go to sleep by midnight.
At midnight, I consider my alternatives. For the moment, I feel an urge to keep playing
Civilization. But I know I'll be miserable tomorrow if I haven't gotten enough sleep.
Being a hyperbolic discounter, I value the next ten minutes a lot, but after that the
curve becomes pretty ﬂat and maybe I don't value 12:20 much more than I value the
next morning at work. Ten minutes' sleep here or there doesn't make any diﬀerence.
So I say: "I will play Civilization for ten minutes - 'just one more turn' - and then I will
go to bed."
Time passes. It is now 12:10. Still being a hyperbolic discounter, I value the next ten
minutes a lot, and subsequent times much less. And so I say: I will play until 12:20,
ten minutes sleep here or there not making much diﬀerence, and then sleep.
And so on until my empire bestrides the globe and the rising sun peeps through my
windows.

This is pretty much the same process described above with Murder-Gandhi except that
here the role of the value-changing pill is played by time and my own tendency to
discount hyperbolically.
The solution is the same. If I consider the problem early in the evening, I can
precommit to midnight as a nice round number that makes a good Schelling point.
Then, when deciding whether or not to play after midnight, I can treat my decision not
as "Midnight or 12:10" - because 12:10 will always win that particular race - but as
"Midnight or abandoning the only credible Schelling point and probably playing all
night", which will be suﬃcient to scare me into turning oﬀ the computer.
(if I consider the problem at 12:01, I may be able to precommit to 12:10 if I am
especially good at precommitments, but it's not a very natural Schelling point and it
might be easier to say something like "as soon as I ﬁnish this turn" or "as soon as I
discover this technology").
Coalitions of Resistance
Suppose you are a Zoroastrian, along with 1% of the population. In fact, along with
Zoroastrianism your country has ﬁfty other small religions, each with 1% of the
population. 49% of your countrymen are atheist, and hate religion with a passion.
You hear that the government is considering banning the Taoists, who comprise 1% of
the population. You've never liked the Taoists, vile doubters of the light of Ahura
Mazda that they are, so you go along with this. When you hear the government wants
to ban the Sikhs and Jains, you take the same tack.
But now you are in the unfortunate situation described by Martin Niemoller:
First they came for the socialists, and I did not speak out, because I was not a
socialist.
Then they came for the trade unionists, and I did not speak out, because I was not
a trade unionist.
Then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out, because I was not a Jew.
Then they came for me, but we had already abandoned the only defensible
Schelling point
With the banned Taoists, Sikhs, and Jains no longer invested in the outcome, the 49%
atheist population has enough clout to ban Zoroastrianism and anyone else they want
to ban. The better strategy would have been to have all ﬁfty-one small religions form a
coalition to defend one another's right to exist. In this toy model, they could have
done so in an ecumenial congress, or some other literal strategy meeting.
But in the real world, there aren't ﬁfty-one well-delineated religions. There are billions
of people, each with their own set of opinions to defend. It would be impractical for
everyone to physically coordinate, so they have to rely on Schelling points.
In the original example with the alien, I cheated by using the phrase "right-thinking
people". In reality, ﬁguring out who qualiﬁes to join the Right-Thinking People Club is
half the battle, and everyone's likely to have a diﬀerent opinion on it. So far, the
practical solution to the coordination problem, the "only defensible Schelling point",
has been to just have everyone agree to defend everyone else without worrying
whether they're right-thinking or not, and this is easier than trying to coordinate room
for exceptions like Holocaust deniers. Give up on the Holocaust deniers, and no one

else can be sure what other Schelling point you've committed to, if any...
...unless they can. In parts of Europe, they've banned Holocaust denial for years and
everyone's been totally okay with it. There are also a host of other well-respected
exceptions to free speech, like shouting "ﬁre" in a crowded theater. Presumably, these
exemptions are protected by tradition, so that they have become new Schelling points
there, or are else so obvious that everyone except Holocaust deniers is willing to allow
a special Holocaust denial exception without worrying it will impact their own case.
Summary
Slippery slopes legitimately exist wherever a policy not only aﬀects the world directly,
but aﬀects people's willingness or ability to oppose future policies. Slippery slopes can
sometimes be avoided by establishing a "Schelling fence" - a Schelling point that the
various interest groups involved - or yourself across diﬀerent values and times - make
a credible precommitment to defend.

Intellectual Hipsters and Meta-
Contrarianism
Related to: Why Real Men Wear Pink, That Other Kind of Status, Pretending to be
Wise, The "Outside The Box" Box
WARNING: Beware of things that are fun to argue -- Eliezer Yudkowsky
Science has inexplicably failed to come up with a precise deﬁnition of "hipster", but
from my limited understanding a hipster is a person who deliberately uses unpopular,
obsolete, or obscure styles and preferences in an attempt to be "cooler" than the
mainstream. But why would being deliberately uncool be cooler than being cool?
As previously discussed, in certain situations refusing to signal can be a sign of high
status. Thorstein Veblen invented the term "conspicuous consumption" to refer to the
showy spending habits of the nouveau riche, who unlike the established money of his
day took great pains to signal their wealth by buying fast cars, expensive clothes, and
shiny jewelery. Why was such ﬂashiness common among new money but not old?
Because the old money was so secure in their position that it never even occurred to
them that they might be confused with poor people, whereas new money, with their
lack of aristocratic breeding, worried they might be mistaken for poor people if they
didn't make it blatantly obvious that they had expensive things.
The old money might have started oﬀ not buying ﬂashy things for pragmatic reasons -
they didn't need to, so why waste the money? But if F. Scott Fitzgerald is to be
believed, the old money actively cultivated an air of superiority to the nouveau riche
and their conspicuous consumption; not buying ﬂashy objects becomes a matter of
principle. This makes sense: the nouveau riche need to diﬀerentiate themselves from
the poor, but the old money need to diﬀerentiate themselves from the nouveau riche.
This process is called countersignaling, and one can ﬁnd its telltale patterns in many
walks of life. Those who study human romantic attraction warn men not to "come on
too strong", and this has similarities to the nouveau riche example. A total loser might
come up to a woman without a hint of romance, promise her nothing, and demand
sex. A more sophisticated man might buy roses for a woman, write her love poetry,
hover on her every wish, et cetera; this signiﬁes that he is not a total loser. But the
most desirable men may deliberately avoid doing nice things for women in an attempt
to signal they are so high status that they don't need to. The average man tries to
diﬀerentiate himself from the total loser by being nice; the extremely attractive man
tries to diﬀerentiate himself from the average man by not being especially nice.
In all three examples, people at the top of the pyramid end up displaying
characteristics similar to those at the bottom. Hipsters deliberately wear the same
clothes uncool people wear. Families with old money don't wear much more jewelry
than the middle class. And very attractive men approach women with the same lack of
subtlety a total loser would use.1
If politics, philosophy, and religion are really about signaling, we should expect to ﬁnd
countersignaling there as well.

Pretending To Be Wise
Let's go back to Less Wrong's long-running discussion on death. Ask any ﬁve year old
child, and ey can tell you that death is bad. Death is bad because it kills you. There is
nothing subtle about it, and there does not need to be. Death universally seems bad
to pretty much everyone on ﬁrst analysis, and what it seems, it is.
But as has been pointed out, along with the gigantic cost, death does have a few
small beneﬁts. It lowers overpopulation, it allows the new generation to develop free
from interference by their elders, it provides motivation to get things done quickly.
Precisely because these beneﬁts are so much smaller than the cost, they are hard to
notice. It takes a particularly subtle and clever mind to think them up. Any idiot can
tell you why death is bad, but it takes a very particular sort of idiot to believe that
death might be good.
So pointing out this contrarian position, that death has some beneﬁts, is potentially a
signal of high intelligence. It is not a very reliable signal, because once the ﬁrst person
brings it up everyone can just copy it, but it is a cheap signal. And to the sort of
person who might not be clever enough to come up with the beneﬁts of death
themselves, and only notices that wise people seem to mention death can have
beneﬁts, it might seem super extra wise to say death has lots and lots of great
beneﬁts, and is really quite a good thing, and if other people should protest that death
is bad, well, that's an opinion a ﬁve year old child could come up with, and so clearly
that person is no smarter than a ﬁve year old child. Thus Eliezer's title for this
mentality, "Pretending To Be Wise".
If dwelling on the beneﬁts of a great evil is not your thing, you can also pretend to be
wise by dwelling on the costs of a great good. All things considered, modern industrial
civilization - with its advanced technology, its high standard of living, and its lack of
typhoid fever -  is pretty neat. But modern industrial civilization also has many costs:
alienation from nature, strains on the traditional family, the anonymity of big city life,
pollution and overcrowding. These are real costs, and they are certainly worth taking
seriously; nevertheless, the crowds of emigrants trying to get from the Third World to
the First, and the lack of any crowd in the opposite direction, suggest the beneﬁts
outweigh the costs. But in my estimation - and speak up if you disagree - people
spend a lot more time dwelling on the negatives than on the positives, and most
people I meet coming back from a Third World country have to talk about how much
more authentic their way of life is and how much we could learn from them. This sort
of talk sounds Wise, whereas talk about how nice it is to have buses that don't break
down every half mile sounds trivial and selﬁsh.. 
So my hypothesis is that if a certain side of an issue has very obvious points in
support of it, and the other side of an issue relies on much more subtle points that the
average person might not be expected to grasp, then adopting the second side of the
issue will become a signal for intelligence, even if that side of the argument is wrong.
This only works in issues which are so muddled to begin with that there is no fact of
the matter, or where the fact of the matter is diﬃcult to tease out: so no one tries to
signal intelligence by saying that 1+1 equals 3 (although it would not surprise me to
ﬁnd a philosopher who says truth is relative and this equation is a legitimate form of
discourse).
Meta-Contrarians Are Intellectual Hipsters

A person who is somewhat upper-class will conspicuously signal eir wealth by buying
diﬃcult-to-obtain goods. A person who is very upper-class will conspicuously signal
that ey feels no need to conspicuously signal eir wealth, by deliberately not buying
diﬃcult-to-obtain goods. 
A person who is somewhat intelligent will conspicuously signal eir intelligence by
holding diﬃcult-to-understand opinions. A person who is very intelligent will
conspicuously signal that ey feels no need to conspicuously signal eir intelligence, by
deliberately not holding diﬃcult-to-understand opinions.
According to the survey, the average IQ on this site is around 1452. People on this site
diﬀer from the mainstream in that they are more willing to say death is bad, more
willing to say that science, capitalism, and the like are good, and less willing to say
that there's some deep philosophical sense in which 1+1 = 3. That suggests people
around that level of intelligence have reached the point where they no longer feel it
necessary to diﬀerentiate themselves from the sort of people who aren't smart
enough to understand that there might be side beneﬁts to death. Instead, they are at
the level where they want to diﬀerentiate themselves from the somewhat smarter
people who think the side beneﬁts to death are great. They are, basically, meta-
contrarians, who counter-signal by holding opinions contrary to those of the
contrarians' signals. And in the case of death, this cannot but be a good thing.
But just as contrarians risk becoming too contrary, moving from "actually, death has a
few side beneﬁts" to "DEATH IS GREAT!", meta-contrarians are at risk of becoming too
meta-contrary.
All the possible examples here are controversial, so I will just take the least
controversial one I can think of and beg forgiveness. A naive person might think that
industrial production is an absolute good thing. Someone smarter than that naive
person might realize that global warming is a strong negative to industrial production
and desperately needs to be stopped. Someone even smarter than that, to
diﬀerentiate emself from the second person, might decide global warming wasn't such
a big deal after all, or doesn't exist, or isn't man-made.
In this case, the contrarian position happened to be right (well, maybe), and the third
person's meta-contrariness took em further from the truth. I do feel like there are
more global warming skeptics among what Eliezer called "the
atheist/libertarian/technophile/sf-fan/early-adopter/programmer empirical cluster in
personspace" than among, say, college professors.
In fact, very often, the uneducated position of the ﬁve year old child may be deeply
ﬂawed and the contrarian position a necessary correction to those ﬂaws. This makes
meta-contrarianism a very dangerous business. 
Remember, most everyone hates hipsters.
Without meaning to imply anything about whether or not any of these positions are
correct or not3, the following triads come to mind as connected to an
uneducated/contrarian/meta-contrarian divide:
- KKK-style racist / politically correct liberal / "but there are scientiﬁcally proven
genetic diﬀerences"

- misogyny / women's rights movement / men's rights movement
- conservative / liberal / libertarian4
- herbal-spiritual-alternative medicine / conventional medicine / Robin Hanson
- don't care about Africa / give aid to Africa / don't give aid to Africa
- Obama is Muslim / Obama is obviously not Muslim, you idiot / Patri Friedman5
What is interesting about these triads is not that people hold the positions (which
could be expected by chance) but that people get deep personal satisfaction from
arguing the positions even when their arguments are unlikely to change policy6 - and
that people identify with these positions to the point where arguments about them
can become personal.
If meta-contrarianism is a real tendency in over-intelligent people, it doesn't mean
they should immediately abandon their beliefs; that would just be meta-meta-
contrarianism. It means that they need to recognize the meta-contrarian tendency
within themselves and so be extra suspicious and careful about a desire to believe
something contrary to the prevailing contrarian wisdom, especially if they really enjoy
doing so.
Footnotes
1) But what's really interesting here is that people at each level of the pyramid don't
just follow the customs of their level. They enjoy following the customs, it makes them
feel good to talk about how they follow the customs, and they devote quite a bit of
energy to insulting the people on the other levels. For example, old money call the
nouveau riche "crass", and men who don't need to pursue women call those who do
"chumps". Whenever holding a position makes you feel superior and is fun to talk
about, that's a good sign that the position is not just practical, but signaling related.
2) There is no need to point out just how unlikely it is that such a number is correct,
nor how unscientiﬁc the survey was.
3) One more time: the fact that those beliefs are in an order does not mean some of
them are good and others are bad. For example, "5 year old child / pro-death /
transhumanist" is a triad, and "warming denier / warming believer / warming skeptic"
is a triad, but I personally support 1+3 in the ﬁrst triad and 2 in the second. You can't
evaluate the truth of a statement by its position in a signaling game; otherwise you
could use human psychology to ﬁgure out if global warming is real!
4) This is my solution to the eternal question of why libertarians are always more
hostile toward liberals, even though they have just about as many points of real
disagreement with the conservatives.
5) To be fair to Patri, he admitted that those two posts were "trolling", but I think the
fact that he derived so much enjoyment from trolling in that particular way is
signiﬁcant.
6) Worth a footnote: I think in a lot of issues, the original uneducated position has
disappeared, or been relegated to a few rednecks in some remote corner of the world,
and so meta-contrarians simply look like contrarians. I think it's important to keep the
terminology, because most contrarians retain a psychology of feeling like they are
being contrarian, even after they are the new norm. But my only evidence for this is
introspection, so it might be false.

Cardiologists and Chinese Robbers
I.
It takes a special sort of person to be a cardiologist. This is not always a good thing.
You may have read about one or another of the "cardiologist caught falsifying test
results and performing dangerous unnecessary surgeries to make more money"
stories, but you might not have realized just how common it really is. Maryland
cardiologist performs over 500 dangerous unnecessary surgeries to make money.
Unrelated Maryland cardiologist performs another 25 in a separate incident. California
cardiologist does "several hundred" dangerous unnecessary surgeries and gets raided
by the FBI. Philadelphia cardiologist, same. North Carolina cardiologist, same. 11
Kentucky cardiologists, same. Actually just a couple of miles from my own hospital, a
Michigan cardiologist was found to have done $4 million worth of the same. Etc, etc,
etc.
My point is not just about the number of cardiologists who perform dangerous
unnecessary surgeries for a quick buck. It's not even just about the cardiology
insurance fraud, cardiology kickback schemes, or cardiology research data falsiﬁcation
conspiracies. That could all just be attributed to some distorted incentives in
cardiology as a ﬁeld. My point is that it takes a special sort of person to be a
cardiologist.
Consider the sexual harassment. Head of Yale cardiology department ﬁred for sexual
harassment with "rampant bullying". Stanford cardiologist charged with sexually
harassing students. Baltimore cardiologist found guilty of sexual harassment. LA
cardiologist ﬁned $200,000 for groping med tech. Three diﬀerent Pennsylvania
cardiologists sexually harassing the same woman. Arizona cardiologist suspended on
19 (!) diﬀerent counts of sexual abuse. One of the "world's leading cardiologists" ﬁred
for sending pictures of his genitals to a female friend. New York cardiologist in trouble
for refusing to pay his $135,000 bill at a strip club. Manhattan cardiologist taking
naked pictures of patients, then using them to sexually abuse employees. New York
cardiologist secretly installs spycam in oﬃce bathroom. Just to shake things up, a
Florida cardiologist was falsely accused of sexual harassment as part of feud with
another cardiologist.
And yeah, you can argue that if you put high-status men in an oﬃce with a lot of
subordinates, sexual harassment will be depressingly common just as a result of the
environment. But there's also the Texas cardiologist who pled guilty to child
molestation. The California cardiologist who killed a two-year-old kid. The author of
one of the world's top cardiology textbooks arrested on charges Wikipedia describes
only as "related to child pornography and cocaine".
Then it gets weird. Did you about the Australian cardiologist who is ﬁghting against
extradition to Uganda, where he is accused of "terrorism, aggravated robbery and
murdering seven people"? What about the Long Island cardiologist who hired a hitman
to kill a rival cardiologist, ahd who was also for some reason looking for "enough
explosives to blow up a building"?
Like I said, it takes a special sort of person.
II.

Given the recent discussion of media bias here, I wanted to bring up Alyssa Vance's
"Chinese robber fallacy", which she describes as:
..where you use a generic problem to attack a speciﬁc person or group, even
though other groups have the problem just as much (or even more so).
For example, if you don't like Chinese people, you can ﬁnd some story of a Chinese
person robbing someone, and claim that means there's a big social problem with
Chinese people being robbers.
I originally didn't ﬁnd this too interesting. It sounds like the same idea as plain old
stereotyping, something we think about often and are carefully warned to avoid.
But after re-reading the post, I think the argument is more complex. There are over a
billion Chinese people. If even one in a thousand is a robber, you can provide one
million examples of Chinese robbers to appease the doubters. Most people think of
stereotyping as "Here's one example I heard of where the out-group does something
bad," and then you correct it with "But we can't generalize about an entire group just
from one example!" It's less obvious that you may be able to provide literally one
million examples of your false stereotype and still have it be a false stereotype. If you
spend twelve hours a day on the task and can describe one crime every ten seconds,
you can spend four months doing nothing but providing examples of burglarous
Chinese - and still have absolutely no point.
If we're really concerned about media bias, we need to think about Chinese Robber
Fallacy as one of the media's strongest weapons. There are lots of people - 300 million
in America alone. No matter what point the media wants to make, there will be
hundreds of salient examples. No matter how low-probability their outcome of interest
is, they will never have to stop covering it if they don't want to.
This has brieﬂy gotten some coverage in the form of "the war on police". As per AEI:
Is there a "war on police" in America today? Most Americans think so, and that's
understandable given all of the media coverage of that topic. A Google news
search ﬁnds 32,000 results for the phrase "war on cops" and another 12,100
results for "war on police," with sensational headlines like "America's War on Cops
Intensiﬁes" and "Bratton Warns of Tough Times Ahead Due to 'War on Cops'." A
recent Rasmussen poll found that 58% of likely US voters answered "Yes" to the
question "Is there a war on police in America today?" and only 27% disagreed. But
data on police shootings in America that were reported last week by The Guardian
tell a much diﬀerent story of increasing police safety.
According to data available from the "Oﬃcer Down Memorial Page" on the annual
number of non-accidental, ﬁrearm-related police fatalities, 2015 is on track to be
the safest year for law enforcement in the US since 1887 (except for a slightly
safer year in 2013), more than 125 years ago. And adjusted for the country's
growing population, the years 2013 and 2015 will be the two safest years for
police in US history, measured by the annual number of ﬁrearm-related police
fatalities per 1 million people.
When politically convenient, it is easy to make Americans believe in a war on police
simply by better coverage of existing murders of police oﬃcers. Given that America is
a big country with very many police, even a low base rate will provide many lurid
police-oﬃcer-murder stories - by my calculation, two murders a week even if oﬃcers
are killed only at the same rate as everyone else. While covering these is a legitimate

decision, it can be deceptive unless it's framed in terms of things like whether the rate
has gone up or down, whether the rate is higher or lower for the group involved than
the base rate in the population, and it still seems scary when you explicitly calculate
the rate.
But a Chomskian analysis would ask whether the talk of a "war on cops" is really a
uniquely bad example of journalistic malpractice, or whether it is bog-standard
journalistic malpractice which is unique only in being called out this time instead of
allowed to pass.
Let's stick with coverage of police for consistency's sake. I've made a very similar
argument before regarding claims of racist police shootings (see Part D here), but let's
avoid that particular rabbit hole and consider a broader and more unsettling point. We
all hear anecdotes about terrible police brutality. Suppose, in fact, that we've heard
exactly X stories. Given that there are about 100,000 police oﬃcers in the US, is X
consistent with the problem being systemic and dire, or with the problem being
relatively limited?
I mean, it's hard to say. Quick Fermi calculation: if I can think of about one horrible
story of police brutality a week, and assume there are ﬁfty that aren't covered for
every one that is, then per year that makes...
But wait - what if I told you that number was a lie, and there were actually 500,000
police oﬃcers in the US? Suddenly the rate of police brutality has decreased ﬁve times
from what it was a second ago. If you previously believed that there were 100,000
police oﬃcers, and that the police brutality rate was shameful but that decreasing the
rate to only one-ﬁfth its previous level would count as a victory, well, now you can
declare victory.
What if I told you the 500,000 number is also a lie, and it's actually way more cops
than that? Do you have any idea at all how many police there are? Shouldn't you at
least have an order-of-magnitude estimate of what the police brutality rate is before
deciding if it's too high or not? What if I told you the real number was a million cops?
Five million cops? Ten million? That's a hundred times the original estimate of 100,000
- shouldn't learning that the police brutality rate is only 1% of what you originally
estimated (or, going the other direction, 10,000% of that) change your opinion in
some way?
(No, I won't tell you how many cops there actually are. Look it up.)
I feel this way about a lot of things. The media is always giving us stories of how tech
nerds are sexist in some way or another. But we may suspect they want to push that
line regardless of whether it's true. How many tech nerds are there? A million? Ten
million? How many lurid stories about harassment in Silicon Valley have you heard?
Do we know if this is higher or lower than the base rate for similar industries? Whether
it's going up or down? What it would look like if we actually had access to the per
person rates?
By now you've probably ﬁgured out the gimmick, but just to come totally clean -
cardiologists are wonderful people who as far as I know are no less ethical than any
other profession. I chose to pick on them at random - well, not quite random, one of
them yelled at me the other day because apparently contacting the cardiologist on
call late at night just because your patient is having a serious heart-related
emergency is some kind of huge medical faux pas. I don't think anyone has ever

claimed that there's any general issue with cardiologists, and as far as I know there's
no evidence for such.
If you read Part I of this post and found yourself nodding along, thinking "Wow,
cardiologists are real creeps, there must be serious structural problems in the
cardiology profession, something must be done about them," consider it evidence that
a suﬃciently motivated individual - especially a journalist! - can make you feel that
way about any group.

All Debates Are Bravery Debates
"I don't practice what I preach because I'm not the kind of person I'm preaching to."
— Bob Dobbs
I.
I read Atlas Shrugged probably about a decade ago, and felt turned oﬀ by its
promotion of selﬁshness as a moral ideal. I thought that was basically just being a
jerk. After all, if there's one thing the world doesn't need (I thought) it's more
selﬁshness.
Then I talked to a friend who told me Atlas Shrugged had changed his life. That he'd
been raised in a really strict family that had told him that ever enjoying himself was
selﬁsh and made him a bad person, that he had to be working at every moment to
make his family and other people happy or else let them shame him to pieces. And
the revelation that it was sometimes okay to consider your own happiness gave him
the strength to stand up to them and turn his life around, while still keeping the basic
human instinct of helping others when he wanted to and he felt they deserved it (as,
indeed, do Rand characters).
II.
The religious and the irreligious alike enjoy making fun of Reddit's r/atheism, which
combines an extreme strawmanning of religious positions with childish insults and
distasteful triumphalism. Recently the moderators themselves have become a bit
embarrassed by it and instituted some rules intended to tone things down, leading to
some of the most impressive Internet drama I have ever seen. In its midst, some
people started talking about what the old strawmanning triumphalist r/atheism meant
to them (see for example here).
A lot of them were raised in religious families where they would have been disowned if
they had admitted to their atheism. Some of them were disowned for admitting to
atheism, or lost boyfriends/girlfriends, or were terriﬁed they might go to Hell. And then
they found r/atheism, and saw people making fun of religion, and insulting it, in really
REALLY oﬀensive ways. And no one was striking them down with lightning. No one was
shouting them down. No one was doing much of anything at all. And to see this taboo
violated in the most shocking possible way with no repercussions sort of broke the
spell for them, like as long as people were behaving respectfully to religion, even
respectfully disagreeing, it still had this aura of invincibility about it, but if some
perfectly normal person can post a a stupid comic where Jesus has gay sex with
Mohammed, then there's this whole other world out there where religion holds no
power.
Gilbert tells the story of how when, as a young Christian struggling with doubt, he
would read r/atheism to remind himself that atheists could be pretty awful. r/atheism
is doing a bad job at being the sort of people who can convert Gilbert, and the new
mods' policy of "you should have more civil and intellectual discussions" might work
better on him. I think it would work better on me too.
But there is - previously unappreciated by me - a large population of people for whom
really dumb oﬀensive strawmannish memes are exactly what they need.

III.
A friend described his experiences in the Landmark Forum's self-improvement
workshop. He said their modus operandi was to get people to take responsibility for
the outcome of their actions. His example was an oﬃce worker who always did
substandard work, and was always making excuses like "My boss doesn't s support
me" or "My computer system isn't good enough" or "My coworkers aren't pulling their
fair share." Landmark says those kinds of excuses are what's keeping you back. And
they taught (again, according to this one person) that the solution was to treat
everything that happens in your life as your responsiblity - no excuses, just "it was my
fault" or "it's to my credit".
Then a few days later, I was reading a book on therapy which contained the phrase (I
copied it down to make sure I got it right) "Don't be so hard on yourself. No one else is
as hard on yourself as you are. You are your own worst critic."
Notice that this encodes the exact opposite assumption. Landmark claims its
members are biased against ever thinking ill of themselves, even when they deserve
it. The therapy book claims that patients are biased towards always thinking ill of
themselves, even when they don't deserve it.
And you know, both claims are probably spot on. There are deﬁnitely people who are
too hard on themselves. Ozy Frantz has done an amazing job of getting me and many
other people inclined towards skepticism about feminist and transgender issues,
engaging with us, and gradually convincing us to be more respectful and aware
through sheer kindness and willingness to engage people reasonably on every part of
the political spectrum. Two days ago some people on Twitter - who were angry Ozy
said one need not boycott everything Orson Scott Card has ever written just because
he's against gay marriage - told Ozy they weren't a real transgender person and
suggested lots of people secretly disliked them. And instead of doing what I would do
and telling the trolls to go to hell, Ozy freaked out and worried they was doing
everything wrong and decided to delete everything they had ever written online. I
know Ozy is their own worst critic and if that therapy book was aimed at people like
them, it was entirely correct to say what it said.
On the other hand, I look at people like Amy's Baking Company, who are obviously
terrible people, who get a high-status professional chef as well as thousands of
random joes informing them of exactly what they are doing wrong, who are so clearly
in the wrong that it seems impossible not to realize it - and who then go on to
attribute the negativity to a "conspiracy" against them and deny any wrongdoing.
They could probably use some Landmark.
IV.
In a recent essay I complained about bravery debates, arguments where people boast
about how brave they are to take an unorthodox and persecuted position, and their
opponents counter that they're not persecuted heretics, they're a vast leviathan
persecuting everyone else. But I think I underestimated an important reason why
some debates have to be bravery debates.
Suppose there are two sides to an issue. Be more or less selﬁsh. Post more or less
oﬀensive atheist memes. Be more or less willing to blame and criticize yourself.
There are some people who need to hear each side of the issue. Some people really
need to hear the advice "It's okay to be selﬁsh sometimes!" Other people really need

to hear the advice "You are being way too selﬁsh and it's not okay."
It's really hard to target advice at exactly the people who need it. You can't go around
giving everyone surveys to see how selﬁsh they are, and give half of them Atlas
Shrugged and half of them the collected works of Peter Singer. You can't even write
really complicated books on how to tell whether you need more or less selﬁshness in
your life - they're not going to be as buyable, as readable, or as memorable as Atlas
Shrugged. To a ﬁrst approximation, all you can do is saturate society with pro-
selﬁshness or anti-selﬁshness messages, and realize you'll be hurting a select few
people while helping the majority.
But in this case, it makes a really big deal what the majority actually is.
Suppose an Objectivist argues "Our culture has become too self-sacriﬁcing! Everyone
is told their entire life that the only purpose of living is to work for other people. As a
result, people are miserable and no one is allowed to enjoy themselves at all." If
they're right, then helping spread Objectivism is probably a good idea - it will help
these legions of poor insuﬃciently-selﬁsh people, but there will be very few too-
selﬁsh-already people who will be screwed up by the advice.
But suppose Peter Singer argues "We live in a culture of selﬁshness! Everyone is
always told to look out for number one, and the poor are completely neglected!" Well,
then we want to give everyone the collected works of Peter Singer so we can solve
this problem, and we don't have to worry about accidentally traumatizing the poor
self-sacriﬁcing people more, because we've already agreed there aren't very many of
these at all.
It's much easier to be charitable in political debates when you view the two
participants as coming from two diﬀerent cultures that err on opposite sides, each
trying to propose advice that would help their own culture, each being tragically
unaware that the other culture exists.
A lot of the time this happens when one person is from a dysfunctional community
and suggesting very strong measures against some problem the community faces,
and the other person is from a functional community and thinks the ﬁrst person is
being extreme, fanatical or persecutory.
This happens a lot among, once again, atheists. One guy is like "WE NEED TO
DESTROY RELIGION IT CORRUPTS EVERYTHING IT TOUCHES ANYONE WHO MAKES ANY
COMPROMISES WITH IT IS A TRAITOR KILL KILL KILL." And the other guy is like "Hello?
Religion may not be literally true, but it usually just makes people feel more
comfortable and inspires them to do nice things and we don't want to look like huge
jerks here." Usually the ﬁrst guy was raised Jehovah's Witness and the second guy
was raised Moralistic Therapeutic Deist.
But I've also sometimes had this issue when I talk to feminists. They're like "Guys
need to be more concerned about women's boundaries, and women need to be willing
to shame and embarrass guys who hit on them inappropriately." And maybe they
spent high school hanging out with bros on the football team who thought asking
women's consent was a boring technicality, and I spent high school hanging out
entirely with extremely considerate but very shy geeks who spent their teenage years
in a state of nightmarish loneliness and depression because they were too scared to
ask out women because the woman might try to shame and embarrass them for it.

And the big one is trust. There are so many people from extremely functional
communities saying that people need to be more trusting and kind and take people at
their word more often, and so many people from dysfunctional communities saying
that's not how it works. Both are no doubt backed by ample advice from their own
lives.
A blog like this one probably should promote the opinions and advice most likely to be
underrepresented in the blog-reading populace (which is totally diﬀerent from the
populace at large). But this might convince "thought leaders", who then use it to
inspire change in the populace at large, which will probably be in the wrong direction. I
think most of my friends are too leftist but society as a whole is too rightist - should I
spread leftist or rightist memes among my friends?
I feel pretty okay about both being sort of a libertarian and writing an essay arguing
against libertarianism, because the world generally isn't libertarian enough but the
sorts of people who read long online political essays generally are way more
libertarian than can possibly be healthy.

The Virtue of Silence
Leah Libresco writes a couple of essays (1, 2) on an ethical dilemma reported in the
New York Times. In the course of a conﬁdential medical history, a doctor hears her
patient is suﬀering from stress-related complaints after having sent an innocent man
to prison. The doctor wants to know whether it is ethical to report the matter to the
police. The Times' columnist says yes - it would save the poor prisoner. Leah says no -
violating medical conﬁdentiality creates an expectation that medical conﬁdentiality
will be violated in the future, thus dooming patients who are too afraid to talk about
drug use or gay sex or other potentially embarrassing but important medical risk
factors.
But both sides are ignoring the much bigger dilemma lurking one meta-level up: is it
ethical to debate this dilemma in the New York Times?
Let's look more closely at that phrase "violating medical conﬁdentiality creates an
expectation that medical conﬁdentiality will be violated in the future." There's a very
abstruse angels-and-clockwork interpretation of "creates an expectation" where, by
making the decision to violate conﬁdentiality, you are altering the Platonic machinery
of the Universe in a way that allows other beings who know your source code to
determine that you will do this. But most people don't have the decision theory to
understand this, and anyway most doctors do not publish their source code online.
The way "creates an expectation" pans out in our universe is that somebody hears
that a doctor violated medical conﬁdentiality, and that person tells someone else, and
that person tells someone else, until eventually someone who was going to tell their
doctor about having gay sex with drugs remembers having heard the story and
decides not to.
How exactly would people hear about this doctor who revealed the innocence of the
prisoner? Through the ensuing court case? Nah. Most people wouldn't obsessively
read the minutes of every single case at the local courthouse unless of course it has
something to do with gender. Really, the only way that someone could hear about a
doctor violating medical conﬁdentiality is if she, like, somehow got a description of her
intention to do so published in meticulous detail in the New York Times.
Oh, right.
The entire negative eﬀect of the doctor breaking her promise is that it would make
people doubt medical conﬁdentiality in the future. But whether or not the doctor ends
up breaking her promise, thousands of New York Times readers now know that doctors
strongly consider breaking medical conﬁdentiality, and that ethics columnists tell
them it's okay to do so. It seems like the whether the doctor actually keeps her
promise or not in this particular case is of miniscule importance compared to the
damage that the column has already done.
Silence is a hard virtue. All the other virtues have the advantage that, when you
practice them, people will praise you. Sometimes if your moral system is very
diﬀerent from your friends' people will attack you for your virtues, but getting
attacked by suﬃciently horrible people can sometimes be just as gratifying as praise.
But if you stay silent, there's no praise and no attacks. By deﬁnition, no one even
knows you made a courageous moral choice.

(Eliezer mentioned in the comments of my Against Bravery Debates that he's spent a
couple decades pushing ideas almost everyone else thinks are crackpot, and he's
never appealed to bravery at all. He is one hundred percent correct and I have one
hundred percent never noticed despite reading almost everything he's written for
several years. That's the Virtue of Silence for you.)
(I had like ﬁve much better examples here, all of which would be very clever, and each
time I had to catch myself and say "Wait a second, by bringing that up I'm violating
the virtue I'm supposed to be pushing here, aren't I?")
One example of silence I deeply appreciate is people who don't talk about the latest
viral issue. I'm trying to think of an example that's not too destructive to bring up...
hmmmm...go for something old...Elevatorgate! Nearly everyone who talked about
Elevatorgate mentioned that it was outrageous that the blogosphere was making such
a big deal about it, missing the similarity to the old adage that "you aren't stuck in
traﬃc, you are traﬃc." Somewhere there was someone who wanted to write about
Elevatorgate, thought about it, and decided not to. That person deserves the sincere
thanks of a grateful Internet.
So having made the case for the other side of the conﬁdentiality-newspaper meta-
dilemma, am I actually pushing the claim that it is a moral law not to publicize
information that could have bad consequences?
But I notice that this sort of thing almost always ends up making people angry and
having a perverse eﬀect where demands not to draw Mohammed turn into Everyone
Draw Mohammed Day (see: Streisand Eﬀect). It also sometimes snowballs to the point
where not only can you not talk about X, but you can't talk about the demand not to
talk about X because that would be referring to X obliquely, and you can't talk about
the demand not to talk about the demand to talk about X, until eventually you climb
up so many meta-levels that you collapse from hypoxia and have to be rescued by
Sherpas. Then you get a "callout culture" where people try to gain easy Virtue Points
by telling people discussing issues that they Should Not Be Discussing Them and other
people try to gain easy Virtue Points by being the Brave Defender of Freedom of
Speech.
And maybe that's useful if it's something like gender where everyone wants to talk
about it all the time anyway, but we don't really need to do that to medical
conﬁdentiality, do we?
Maybe this is one of those rare cases where the word "supererogatory" might be
useful. Yelling at people who talk about violations of medical conﬁdentiality would just
lead to "ARE OUR DISCUSSIONS OF MEDICAL CONFIDENTIALITY BEING SILENCED??!?"
on the front page of the New York Times. And fretting over talking about it with your
friends, or publishing a blog article about it (cough) is probably on the moral level of
those Jains who walk everywhere with a broom in front of them so that they don't
accidentally squash any bugs. But if someone is really really concerned about it and
wants to be a great person, then yeah, I think writing to the New York Times about it
requires a bit of thought.
And since I am publishing a blog article about it (VIRTUE OF SILENCE IS REALLY HARD!)
let me restore some Virtue Points by conﬁrming that I will not betray private patient
information of this sort if such a dilemma comes up except when legally required.
Trust me, I'm a doctor.

Proving Too Much
The fallacy of Proving Too Much is when you challenge an argument because, in
addition to proving its intended conclusion, it also proves obviously false conclusions.
For example, if someone says "You can't be an atheist, because it's impossible to
disprove the existence of God", you can answer "That argument proves too much. If
we accept it, we must also accept that you can't disbelieve in Bigfoot, since it's
impossible to disprove his existence as well."
I love this tactic so much. I only learned it had a name quite recently, but it's been my
default style of argument for years. It neatly cuts through complicated issues that
might otherwise be totally irresolvable.
Because here is a fundamental principle of the Dark Arts - you don't need an
argument that can't be disproven, only an argument that can't be disproven in the
amount of time your opponent has available.
In a presidential debate, where your opponent has three minutes, that means all you
need to do is come up with an argument whose disproof is inferentially distant enough
from your audience that it will take your opponent more than three minutes to explain
it, or your audience more than three minutes' worth of mental eﬀort to understand the
explanation.
The noncentral fallacy is the easiest way to do this. "Martin Luther King was a
criminal!" "Although what you say is technically correct, categories don't work in the
way your statement is impl - " "Oh, sorry, time's up."
But pretty much anything that assumes a classical Aristotelian view of
concepts/objects is gold here. The same is true of any deontological rules your
audience might be attached to.
I tend to get stuck in the position of having argue against those Dark Artsy tactics
pretty often. And the great thing about Proving Too Much is that it can demolish an
entire complicated argument based on all sorts of hard-to-tease-apart axioms in a
split second. For example, After Virtue gave (though it does not endorse) this example
of deontological reasoning:
I cannot will that my mother should have had an abortion when she was pregnant
with me, except perhaps if it had been certain that the embryo was dead or
gravely damaged. But if I cannot will this in my own case, how can I consistently
deny to others the right to life that I claim for myself? I would break the so-called
Golden Rule unless I denied that a mother in general has a right to an abortion.
It seemed unfair for me to move on in the book without at least checking whether this
argument was correct and I should re-evaluate my pro-choice position. But that would
require sorting through all the weird baggage here, like what it means to will
something, and whether your obligations to potential people are the same as your
obligations to real people, and how to apply the Golden Rule across diﬀerent levels of
potentiality.
Instead I just thought to myself: "Imagine my mother had raped my father, leading to
my conception. I cannot will that a policeman had prevented this rape, but I also do

not want to enshrine the general principle that policemen in general have no right to
prevent rape. Therefore, this argument proves too much." It took all of ﬁve seconds.
Sometimes a quick Proving Too Much can tear apart extremely subtle philosophical
arguments that have been debated for centuries. For example, Pascal's Wager also
proves Pascal's Mugging (they may both be correct, but bringing the Mugging in at
least proves ignoring their correctness to be a reasonable and impossible-to-critique
life choice). And Anselm's Ontological Argument seems much less foreboding when
you realize it can double as a method for creating jelly donuts on demand.
Interestingly, I think that one of the examples of proving too much on Wikipedia can
itself be demolished by a proving too much argument, but I'm not going to say which
one it is because I want to see if other people independently come to the same
conclusion.

Beware Isolated Demands For Rigor
I.
From Identity, Personal Identity, and the Self by John Perry:
"There is something about practical things that knocks us oﬀ our philosophical
high horses. Perhaps Heraclitus really thought he couldn't step in the same river
twice. Perhaps he even received tenure for that contribution to philosophy. But
suppose some other ancient had claimed to have as much right as Heraclitus did
to an ox Heraclitus had bought, on the grounds that since the animal had
changed, it wasn't the same one he had bought and so was up for grabs.
Heraclitus would have quickly come up with some ersatz, watered-down version of
identity of practical value for dealing with property rights, oxen, lyres, vineyards,
and the like. And then he might have wondered if that watered-down vulgar sense
of identity might be a considerably more valuable concept than a pure and
philosophical sort of identity that nothing has.
Okay, but I can think of something worse than that.
Imagine Heraclitus as a cattle rustler in the Old West. Every time a rancher catches
him at his nefarious business, he patiently explains to them that identity doesn't exist,
and therefore the same argument against private property as made above.
Flummoxed, they're unable to think of a response before he rides oﬀ into the sunset.
But then when Heraclitus himself needs the concept of stable personal identity for
something - maybe he wants to deposit his ill-gotten gains in the bank with certainty
that the banker will give it back to him next time he shows up to withdraw it, or
maybe he wants to bribe the sheriﬀ to ignore his activities for the next while - all of a
sudden Heraclitus is willing to tolerate the watered-down vulgar sense of identity like
everyone else.
(actually, I can think of something even worse than that, which is a TV western based
on this premise, where a roving band of pre-Socratic desperadoes terrorizes Texas.
The climax is no doubt when the hero strides onto Main Street, revolver in hand,
saying "There's a new sheriﬀ in town." And Parmenides gruﬄy responds "No, I'm
pretty sure that's impossible.")
At its best, philosophy is a revolutionary pursuit that dissolves our common-sense
intuitions and exposes the possibility of much deeper structures behind them. One
can respond by becoming a saint or madman, or by becoming a pragmatist who is
willing to continue to participate in human society while also understanding its
theoretical limitations. Both are respectable career paths.
The problem is when someone chooses to apply philosophical rigor selectively.
Heraclitus could drown in his deeper understanding of personal identity and become a
holy madman, eschewing material things and taking no care for the morrow because
he does not believe there is any consistent self to experience it. Or he could engage
with it from afar, becoming a wise scholar who participating in earthly aﬀairs while
drawing equanimity from the realization that there is a sense in which all his
accomplishments will be impermanent.

But if he only applies his new theory when he wants other people's cows, then we
have a problem. Philosophical rigor, usually a virtue, has been debased to an isolated
demand for rigor in cases where it beneﬁts Heraclitus.
A fair use of philosophical rigor would prevent both Heraclitus and his victims from
owning property, and thus either collapse under its own impracticality or usher in a
revolutionary new form of economic thinking. An isolated demand for philosophical
rigor, applied by Heraclitus to other people but never the other way around, would
merely give Heraclitus an unfair advantage in the existing system.
II.
A while ago I wrote a post called Military Strikes Are An Extremely Cheap Way To Help
Foreigners which was a response to a Matt Yglesias post called the opposite. Yglesias
was opposed to "humanitarian" military intervention (think the air strikes on ISIS
going on right now, justiﬁed under the cause of preventing a genocide) and his
argument was that this was extremely cost-ineﬀective compared to just giving the
money to GiveWell's top-rated charity - at the time he was writing, malaria
prevention.
I argued he was wrong about his numbers. But I also argued he was unfairly making
an isolated demand for philosophical rigor.
Once you learn about utilitarianism and eﬀective charity, you can become the holy
madman, donating every cent you have beyond what is strictly necessary to survive
and hold down a job to whatever the top rated charity is.
Or you can become the worldly scholar, continuing to fritter away your money on
things like "hot water" and "food other than gruel" but appreciating the eﬀective-
utilitarian perspective and trying to make a few particularly important concessions to
it.
Or you can use it to steal other people's cows. This is what I accused Matt Yglesias of
doing. Presumably there are lots of government programs Yglesias supports - I
suggested PBS - and he would never dream of demanding that we defund them in the
hopes of donating the money to malaria prevention. But if for political reasons he
doesn't support air strikes, suddenly that plan has to justify itself according to rigorous
criteria that no government program that exists could possibly pass.
Government spending seems to be a particularly fertile case for this problem. I
remember hearing some conservatives complain: sex education in public schools is an
outrage, because my tax dollars are going to support something I believe is morally
wrong.
This is, I guess, a demand for ethical rigor. That no one should ever be forced to pay
for something they don't like. Apply it consistently, and conservatives shouldn't have
to pay for sex ed, liberals shouldn't have to pay for wars, and libertarians shouldn't
have to pay for anything, except maybe a $9.99 tax bill yearly to support the police
and a minimal court system.
Applied consistently, you become the holy madman demanding either total anarchy or
some kind of weird system of tax earmarks which would actually be pretty fun to think
about. Or the worldly scholar with a strong appreciation for libertarian ideas who
needs a really strong foundational justiﬁcation for spending government money on
things that a lot of people oppose.

Applied inconsistently, you're just stealing cows again, coming up with a clever
argument against the programs you don't like while defending the ones you do.
III.
But this is the sort of uncouth behavior we expect of political partisans. What about
science?
Suppose there are scientists on both sides of a controversial issue - for example,
economists studying the minimum wage. One team that supports a minimum wage
comes up with a pretty good study showing with p < 0.05 that minimum wages help
the economy in some relevant way. The Science Czar (of course we have a science
czar! We're not monsters!) notes that p < 0.05 is really a shoddy criterion that can
prove anything and they should come back when they have p < 0.01. I have a huge
amount of sympathy with the Science Czar on this one, by the way.
Soooo the team of economists spends another ﬁve years doing another study and
ﬁnds with p < 0.01 that the minimum wage helps the economy in some important
way. The Science Czar notes that their study was correlational only, and that
correlational studies suck. We really can't show that minimum wages are any good
without a randomized controlled trial. Luckily, the governments of every country in the
world are totally game for splitting their countries in half and instituting diﬀerent
economic regimes in each part for ten years, so after a decade it comes out that in
the randomized controlled trial the minimum wage helped the economy with p < 0.01.
The Science Czar worries about publication bias. What if there were a lot of other
teams who got all the countries in the world to split in half and institute diﬀerent wage
policies in each of the two territories for one decade, but they weren't published
because their results weren't interesting enough? Everything the Science Czar has
said so far makes perfect sense and he is to be commended for his rigor and
commitment to the job. Science is really hard and even tiny methodological mistakes
can in principle invalidate an entire ﬁeld.
But now suppose that a team shows that, in a sample of six restaurants in Podunk
Ohio, there was a nonsigniﬁcant trend towards the minimum wage making things a
little worse.
And the Science Czar says: awesome! That solves that debate, minimum wage is bad,
let's move on to investigating nominal GDP targeting.
Now it looks like the Science Czar is just a jerk who's really against minimum wage. All
his knowledge of the standards of scientiﬁc rigor are going not towards bettering
science, but toward worsering science. He's not trying to create a revolutionary new
scientiﬁc regime, he's taking pot shots.
I see this a lot in medicine. Someone jumps on a new study showing the selenium or
chromium or plutonium or whatever cures cancer. It is brought up that no, really, the
medical community has investigated this sort of thing before, and it has always been
found that it doesn't.
"Well, maybe the medical community wasn't investigating it the right way! Maybe the
investigators were biased! Maybe they didn't randomize right! Maybe they used a
population unusually susceptible to cancer-getting! Ninety percent of medical studies
are wrong! Those twenty experiments showing a lack of eﬀect could be total bunk!"

Yes, maybe these things happened in each of the twenty studies that disagree with
you.
Or maybe they happened in the one contrarian study you are getting so excited
about.
IV.
The unholy combination of isolated demands for philosophical rigor and isolated
demands for scientiﬁc rigor is isolated demands for mathematical-statistical-
conceptual rigor, ie the sort of thing this blog has been talking about all week.
I have already been made fun of for how many diﬀerent things I am metaphorically
comparing IQ to - speed, blood pressure, comas - so I guess it can't hurt to add
another example I only thought of today. How about crime? It's usually measured by
crime rate - a made-up statistic that combines subfactors like arson (maybe higher
when ﬁre insurance pays out better), property damage (maybe higher during periods
of ethnic tension and frequent riots) and theft (maybe higher when income inequality
is worse). There is assumed to be a General Factor Of Crime (presumably caused by
things like poor policing, dark alleys, broken families, et cetera) but I would be
extremely surprised if anyone had ever proven Beyond A Shadow Of A Doubt that the
factor analysis works out here.
When Cosma Shalizi says he's not sure about the factor analysis in IQ, I have no
quarrel with him, because Cosma Shalizi's response to everything in the world is to
glare at it for not being suﬃciently statistically rigorous.
But when other people are totally happy to talk about speed and blood pressure and
comas and the crime rate, and then suddenly switch to a position that we can't talk
about IQ at all unless we have a perfect factor-analytical proof of its obeying certain
statistical rules, then I worry they're just out to steal cows.
Likewise, if someone were to just never acknowledge any sorts of groups of objects
except those that could be statistically proven to fall out into absolutely separate
clusters in which variance within each cluster is less than variance between clusters,
well, at least they would be fun to talk to at dinner parties.
But when people never even begin to question the idea of diﬀerent cultures but make
exacting demands of anyone before they can talk about diﬀerent races - even though
the two ideas are statistically isomorphic - then I think they're just out to steal cows.
So this is another technique for avoiding Eulering - is your interlocutor equally willing
to apply their complex mathematical argument to everything else.
I think if I hadn't known anything about Bayesian probability, I would have examined
the McGrews' Bayesian argument for the Gospels by seeing if it applied equally well to
Mormonism, the control group for Christianity.
V.
The old man stamped his boot in the red dirt, kicking up a tiny cloud of dust. "There's
a new sheriﬀ in town," he told them.
"No, I'm pretty sure that's impossible," says Parmenides. "There's no such thing as
change, only the appearance thereof."

"Well then," says the old man, "I reckon you won't mind the false illusion of your
surroundings appearing to change into a jail cell." And he took out his six-shooter and
held it steady.
"Hold on," said Thales. "We don't want any trouble here. All is water, so all we did was
steal a little bit of water from people. We can give you some water back, and
everything will be even, right?" He gestured to a watering trough for horses on the
side of the street, which was full of the stuﬀ.
"Just so long as you don't mind being sprayed with some very hard water from my
squirt gun," the old man answered, and the six-shooter was pointed at the Milesian
now.
"Ha!" said Zeno of Elea. "You don't scare us. In order to hit Thales, your bullet would
have to get halfway to him, then half of the remaining distance, and so on. But that
would require an inﬁnite number of steps, therefore it is impossible."
"Sorry," said the old man, "I couldn't hear you because it's logically impossible for the
sound waves encoding your speech to reach my ears."
"We're not even the same people as the guys who stole those cattle!" said Heraclitus.
"Personal identity is an illusion!"
"Then you won't mind coming to the courthouse with me," replied the old man "to
help the judge imprison some other people who look just like you."
The last of them, the tall one, said nothing. He just raised his revolver in a ﬂuid motion
and shot at the old man.
The old man saw it coming and jumped out of the way. The air was brieﬂy full of
bullets. Bang! Thales went down! Bang bang! Heraclitus! Bang bang! Parmenides and
Zeno. Bang bang bang! The old man was hit in the arm, but still standing. Bang bang
bang bang...
It was just the old man and the tall one now. The tall one picked up his gun and ﬁred.
Nothing happened. Out of bullets.
The old man smiled wryly, his six-shooter still in his hand.
"I know what you're thinking. You're thinking - did he ﬁre six shots, or only ﬁve? Well,
you've got to ask yourself a question - do you feel lucky? Well, do you, punk?"
The tall one didn't budge. "Man is the measure of all things," said Protagoras. "If I
believe you ﬁred six shots, then by my personal epistemic standards, you ﬁred six
shots."
The old man didn't say anything.
"You see," the Sophist continued. "Out of all of them, I alone was truly consistent.
They all came up with clever theories, then abandoned them whenever it conﬂicted
with their self-interest. I was more honest. I just said at the beginning that my self-
interest determined truth, and so never suﬀered any temptation to depart from my
position."

The old man took oﬀ the bandana covering his face. "Man may be the measure of all
things. But I've taken your measure, Protagoras, and found it wanting."
"Socrates?!" the Sophist gasped.
"The only truly consistent people are the dead, Protagoras," he said - and squeezed
the trigger.

Transhumanist Fables
Once upon a time there were three little pigs who went out into the world to build
their houses. The ﬁrst pig was very lazy and built his house out of straw. The second
pig was a little harder-working and built his house out of sticks. The third pig was the
hardest-working of all, and built his house out of bricks. Then came the Big Bad Wolf.
When he saw the house of straw, he huﬀed and he puﬀed and he blew the house
down, eating the ﬁrst little pig. When he saw the house of sticks, he huﬀed and he
puﬀed and he blew the house down, eating the second little pig. When he saw the
house of bricks, he got out a bazooka and blew the house to pieces, eating the third
little pig.
Moral: Reality doesn't grade on a curve.
Once upon a time there was a big strong troll who lived under a bridge. A little goat
went across the bridge, and the troll reached out to grab and eat the goat. "Wait, Mr.
Troll!", the goat cried. "Soon my brother is coming, and he is even bigger than I am!"
The troll let the goat pass, and soon came another goat, twice as big as the ﬁrst. The
troll reached out to grab and eat him, but the brother likewise objected, saying his
brother was even bigger. Sure enough, a third goat arrived at the bridge, twice as big
as the second, and the troll, now ready for a very hearty dinner, reached out to grab
and eat him. "Wait!" said the third goat. "My brother is the biggest of us all!". So the
troll let the third goat pass. Then came the fourth goat, who was hundreds of miles tall
and blotted out the sun, whose very steps caused earthquakes and made the rivers
change course. Without even noticing, he stepped on bridge and troll, pulverizing both
to bits.
Moral: Sometimes growth is superexponential.
Once upon a time, Chicken Little ran to her friend Henny Penny. "The sky is falling!"
she shouted. "We must tell the king!" Henny Penny joined her, and together they
headed toward the capital. On their way they run into their friend Goosey Loosey. "The
sky is falling!" they shouted. "We must tell the king!" Goosey Loosey joined them, and
together they headed toward the capital. On their way, they ran into the cunning Foxy
Loxy. "The sky is falling!" they shouted. "We must tell the king!" "Oh," said Foxy Loxy.
"I know a shortcut to the palace. Follow me into my den." So the birds all followed
Foxy Loxy into his den, where he ate them all, laughing all the while about how
gullible they were. Then an asteroid hit Earth, killing everyone.
Moral: Beware the absurdity heuristic.
Once upon a time, a young boy named Jack lived with his mother. Their family was
very poor and owned only a single cow. "Go sell this cow at the market," Jack's mother
told him, "so we will have food to eat for the winter." Jack went to the market and
came back with three beans. "These are magic beans!" he told his mother. "A man
told me that when we plant them, they will grow into a beanstalk leading to a land of
inﬁnite riches." His mother pooh - poohed him and threw the beans in the ground
angrily. That winter, they both died of hunger.

Moral: Good decision theories should be able to resist Pascal's Mugging.
Once upon a time, there was an old woodcutter who had no son. He made a little
marionette out of pine wood and named it Pinocchio. Then he wished upon a star that
it could become a real boy. The star turned out to be the evil Red Fairy, who brought
Pinocchio to life, but told him that if he wanted to be a real boy he must murder
everyone in the village. That night, Pinocchio took his father's saw and killed Gepetto
and everyone else in town.
Moral: Never create an intelligence unless you are certain it will share your values.
Once upon a time, an evil witch transformed a prince into a frog, telling him that only
the kiss of a princess could restore him to his proper form. But although he searched
around the world, he could ﬁnd no princess who was willing to kiss a hideous little
frog. Finally, he went to the Wise Wizard. "Gender is a social construct," said the Wise
Wizard. "Just declare your gender identity to be female, then kiss yourself on the hand
or something." So the frog did that, returned to human form, and ruled the land for
many years as a wise and benevolent queen.
Moral: Ability to self-modify is just ridiculously powerful.

...And I Show You How Deep The
Rabbit Hole Goes
.
Seen on Tumblr, along with associated discussion:
Yellow:
People's minds are heartbreaking. Not because people are so bad, but because
they're so good.
Nobody is the villain of their own life story. You must have read hundreds of minds by
now, and it's true. Everybody thinks of themselves as an honest guy or gal just trying
to get by, constantly under assault by circumstances and The System and hundreds
and hundreds of assholes. They don't just sort of believe this. They really believe it.
You almost believe it yourself, when you're deep into a reading. You can very clearly
see the structure of evidence they've built up to support their narrative, and even
though it looks silly to you, you can see why they will never escape it from the inside.
You can see how every insult, every failure, no matter how deserved, is a totally
unexpected kick in the gut.
When you chose the yellow pill, you had high hopes of becoming a spy, or a gossip
columnist, or just the world's greatest saleswoman. The thought of doing any of those
things sickens you now. There is too much anguish in the world already. You feel like
any of those things would be a violation. You brieﬂy try to become a therapist, but it
turns out that actually knowing everything about your client's mind is horrendously
countertherapeutic. Freud can say whatever he wants against defense mechanisms,
but without them, you're defenseless. Your sessions are spent in incisive cutting into
your clients' deepest insecurities alternating with desperate reassurance that they are
good people anyway.
Also, men. You knew, in a vague way, that men thought about sex all the time. But
you didn't realize the, um, content of some of their sexual fantasies. Is it even legal to
fantasize about that? You want to be disgusted with them. But you realize that if you
were as horny as they were all the time, you'd do much the same.
You give up. You become a forest ranger. Not the type who helps people explore the
forest. The other type. The type where you hang out in a small cabin in the middle of
the mountains and never talk to anybody. The only living thing you encounter is the
occasional bear. It always thinks that it is a good bear, a proper bear, that a bear-
hating world has it out for them in particular. You do nothing to disabuse it of this
notion.
Green
The ﬁrst thing you do after taking the green pill is become a sparrow. You soar across
the landscape, feeling truly free for the ﬁrst time in your life.

You make it about ﬁve minutes before a hawk swoops down and grabs you. Turns out
there's an excellent reason real sparrows don't soar freely across the open sky all day.
Moments before your bones are ground in two by its ﬁerce beak, you turn back into a
human. You fall like a stone. You need to turn into a sparrow again, but the hawk is still
there, grabbing on to one of your legs, refusing to let go of its prize just because of
this momentary setback. You frantically wave your arms and shout at it, trying to
scare it away. Finally it ﬂaps away, feeling cheated, and you become a sparrow again
just in time to give yourself a relatively soft landing.
After a few weeks of downtime while you wait for your leg to recover, you become a
ﬁsh. This time you're smarter. You become a great white shark, apex of the food chain.
You will explore the wonders of the ocean depths within the body of an invincible
killing machine.
Well, long story short, it is totally unfair that colossal cannibal great white sharks were
a thing and if you had known this was the way Nature worked you never would have
gone along with this green pill business.
You escape by turning into a blue whale. Nothing eats blue whales, right? You
remember that from your biology class. It is deﬁnitely true.
The last thing you hear is somebody shouting "We found one!" in Japanese. The last
thing you feel is a harpoon piercing your skull. Everything goes black.
Blue
Okay, so you see Florence and Jerusalem and Kyoto in an action-packed afternoon. You
teleport to the top of Everest because it is there, then go to the bottom of the
Marianas Trench. You visit the Amazon Rainforest, the Sahara Desert, and the South
Pole. It takes about a week before you've exhausted all of the interesting tourist sites.
Now what?
You go to the Moon, then Mars, then Titan. These turn out to be even more boring.
Once you get over the exhilaration of being on Mars, there's not a lot to do except
look at rocks. You wonder how the Curiosity Rover lasted so long without dying of
boredom.
You go further aﬁeld. Alpha Centauri A has ﬁve planets orbiting it. The second one is
covered with water. You don't see anything that looks alive in the ocean, though. The
fourth has a big gash in it, like it almost split in two. The ﬁfth has weird stalactite-like
mountains.
What would be really interesting would be another planet with life, even intelligent
life. You teleport further and further aﬁeld. Tau Ceti. Epsilon Eridani. The galactic core.
You see enough geology to give scientists back on Earth excitement-induced seizures
for the nest hundred years, if only you were to tell them about it, which you don't. But
nothing alive. Not so much as a sea cucumber.
You head back to Earth less and less frequently now. Starvation is a physical danger,
so it doesn't bother you, though every so often you do like to relax and eat a nice
warm meal. But then it's back to work. You start to think the Milky Way is a dead zone.
What about Andromeda...?
Orange

You never really realized how incompetent everyone else was, or how much it annoys
you.
You were a consultant, a good one, but you felt like mastering all human skills would
make you better. So you took the orange pill. The next day you go in to advise a tech
company on how they manage the programmers, and you realize that not only are
they managing the programmers badly, but the programmers aren't even writing code
very well. You could write their system in half the time. The layout of their oﬃce is
entirely out of sync with the best-studied ergonomic principles. And the Chinese
translation of their user manual makes several basic errors that anybody with an
encyclopaedic knowledge of relative clauses in Mandarin should have been able to
ﬁgure out.
You once read about something called Gell-Mann Amnesia, where physicists notice
that everything the mainstream says about physics is laughably wrong but think the
rest is okay, doctors notice that everything the mainstream says about medicine is
laughably wrong but think the rest is okay, et cetera. You do not have Gell-Mann
Amnesia. Everyone is terrible at everything all the time, and it pisses you oﬀ.
You gain a reputation both for brilliance and for fearsomeness. Everybody respects
you, but nobody wants to hire you. You bounce from industry to industry, usually
doing jobs for the people at the top whose jobs are so important that the need to get
them done right overrides their desire to avoid contact with you.
One year you get an oﬀer you can't refuse from the King of Saudi Arabia. He's worried
about sedition in the royal family, and wants your advice as a consultant for how to
ensure his government is stable. You travel to Riyadh, and ﬁnd that the entire country
is a mess. His security forces are idiots. But the King is also an idiot, and refuses to
believe you or listen to your recommendations. He tells you things can't possibly be as
bad as all that. You tell him you'll prove that they are.
You didn't plan to become the King of Saudi Arabia, per se. It just sort of happened
when your demonstration of how rebels in the military might launch a coup went
better than you expected. Sometimes you forget how incompetent everybody else is.
You need to keep reminding yourself of that. But not right now. Right now you're busy
building your new capital. How come nobody else is any good at urban planning?
Red
You choose the red pill. BRUTE STRENGTH! That's what's important and valuable in
this twenty-ﬁrst-century economy, right? Some people tell you it isn't, but they don't
seem to have a lot of BRUTE STRENGTH, so what do they know?
You become a weightlifter. Able to lift thousands of pounds with a single hand, you
easily overpower the competition and are crowned whatever the heck it is you get
crowned when you WIN WEIGHTLIFTING CONTESTS. But this fails to translate into
lucrative endorsement contracts. Nobody wants their spokesman to be a bodybuilder
without a sixpack, and although you used to be pretty buﬀ, you're getting scrawnier
by the day. Your personal trainer tells you that you only maintain muscle mass by
doing diﬃcult work at the limit of your ability, but your abilities don't seem to have
any limits. Everything is so easy for you that your body just shrugs it oﬀ eﬀortlessly.
Somehow your BRUTE STRENGTH failed to anticipate this possibility. If only there was
a way to solve your problem by BEING VERY STRONG.

Maybe the Internet can help. You Google "red pill advice". The sites you get don't
seem to bear on your speciﬁc problem, exactly, but they are VERY FASCINATING. You
learn lots of surprising things about gender roles that you didn't know before. It seems
that women like men who have BRUTE STRENGTH. This is relevant to your interests!
You leave the bodybuilding circuit behind and start frequenting nightclubs, where you
constantly boast of your BRUTE STRENGTH to PROVE HOW ALPHA YOU ARE. A lot of
people seem kind of creeped out by a scrawny guy with no muscles going up to every
woman he sees and boasting of his BRUTE STRENGTH, but the Internet tells you that
is because they are BETA CUCKOLD ORBITERS.
Somebody told you once that Internet sites are sometimes inaccurate. You hope it's
not true. How could you ﬁgure out which are the inaccurate ones using BRUTE
STRENGTH?
Pink
You were always pretty, but never pretty pretty. A couple of guys liked you, but they
were never the ones you were into. It was all crushingly unfair. So you took the pink
pill, so that no one would ever be able to not love you again.
You ﬁnd Tyler. Tyler is a hunk. He'd never shown any interest in you before, no matter
how much you ﬂirted with him. You touch him on the arm. His eyes light up.
"Kiss me," you say.
Tyler kisses you. Then he gets a weird look on his face. "Why am I kissing you?" he
asks. "I'm sorry. I don't know what came over me." Then he walks oﬀ.
You wish you had thought further before accepting a superpower that makes people
love you when you touch them, but goes away after you touch them a second time.
Having people love you is a lot less sexy when you can't touch them. You start to feel
a deep sense of kinship with King Midas.
You stop dating. What's the point? They'll just stop liking you when you touch them a
second time. You live alone with a bunch of cats who purr when you pet them, then
hiss when you pet them again.
One night you're in a bar drinking your sorrows away when a man comes up to your
table. "Hey!" he says, "nice hair. Is it real? I'm the strongest person in the world." He
lifts your table over his head with one hand to demonstrate. You are immediately
smitten by his BRUTE STRENGTH and ALPHA MALE BEHAVIOR. You must have him.
You touch his arm. His eyes light up. "Come back to my place," you say. "But don't
touch me."
He seems a little put out by this latter request, but the heat of his passion is so strong
he would do anything you ask. You move in together and are married a few contact-
free months later. Every so often you wonder what it would be like to stroke him, or
feel his scrawny arm on your shoulder. But it doesn't bother you much. You're happy
to just hang out, basking in how STRONG and ALPHA he is.
Grey

Technology! That's what's important and valuable in this twenty-ﬁrst-century
economy, right? Right! For example, ever since you took the grey pill, an increasingly
large share of national GDP has come from ATMs giving you cash because you ask
them to.
Your luck ﬁnally ends outside a bank in Kansas, when a whole squad of FBI agents
ambushes you. You brieﬂy consider going all Emperor Palpatine on their asses, but
caution wins out and you allow yourself to be arrested.
Not wanting to end up on an autopsy table in Roswell, you explain that you're a
perfectly ordinary master hacker. The government oﬀers you a plea bargain: they'll
drop charges if you help the military with cyber-security. You worry that your bluﬀ has
been called until you realize that, in fact, you are a master hacker. So you join the NSA
and begin an illustrious career hacking into Russian databases, stalling Iranian
centrifuges, and causing Chinese military systems to crash at inconvenient times. No
one ever suspects you are anything more than very good at programming.
Once again, your luck runs out. Your handlers ask you to hack into the personal ﬁles of
a mysterious new player on the world stage, a man named William who seems to have
carved himself an empire in the Middle East. You don't ﬁnd anything too damning, but
you turn over what you've got.
A few days later, you're lying in bed drifting oﬀ to sleep when a man suddenly bursts
in through your window brandishing a gun. Thinking quickly, you tell the gun to
explode in his hands. Nothing happens. The man laughs. "It's a decoy gun," he said.
"Just here to scare you. But you bother King William again, and next time I'm coming
with a very real knife." He jumps back out of the window. You call the police, and of
course the CIA and NSA get involved, but he is never caught.
After that, you're always looking over your shoulder. He knew. How did he know? The
level of detective skills it would take in order to track you down and ﬁgure out your
secret - it was astounding! Who was this King William?
You tell your handlers that you're no longer up for the job. They beg, cajole, threaten
to reinstate your prison sentence, but you stand ﬁrm. Finally they transfer you to an
easier assignment in the Moscow embassy. You make Vladimir Putin's phone start
ringing at weird hours of the night so that he never gets enough sleep to think entirely
clearly. It's an easy job, but rewarding, and no assassins ever bother you again.
Black
You know on an intellectual level that there are people who would choose something
other than the black pill, just like you know on an intellectual level that there are
people who shoot up schools. That doesn't mean you expect to ever understand it.
You just wish you could have taken the black pill before you had to decide what pill to
take, so that you could have analyzed your future conditional on taking each, and so
made a more informed decision. But it's not like it was a very hard choice.
The basic principle is this - given a choice between A and B, you solemnly resolve to
do A, then see what the future looks like. Then you solemnly resolve to do B, and do
the same. By this method, you can determine the optimal choice in every situation,
modulo the one month time horizon. You might not be able to decide what career to
pursue, but you can sure as heck ace your job interview.

Also, a millisecond in the future is pretty indistinguishable from the present, so
"seeing" a millisecond into the future gives you pretty much complete knowledge
about the current state of the world.
You are so delighted by your omniscience and your ability to make near-optimal
choices that it takes almost a year before you realize the true extent of your power.
You resolve, on the ﬁrst day of every month, to write down what you see exactly a
month ahead of you. But what you will see a month ahead of you is the piece of paper
on which you have written down what you see a month ahead of that. In this manner,
you can relay messages back to yourself from arbitrarily far into the future - at least
up until your own death.
When you try this, you see yourself a month in the future, just ﬁnishing up writing a
letter that reads as follows:
Dear Past Self:
In the year 2060, scientists invent an Immortality Serum. By this point we are of
course fabulously wealthy, and we are one of the ﬁrst people to partake of it.
Combined with our ability to avoid accidents by looking into the future, this has
allowed us to survive unexpectedly long.
I am sending this from the year 963,445,028,777,216 AD. We are one of the last
hundred people alive in the Universe. The sky is black and without stars; the
inevitable progress of entropy has reduced almost all mass and energy to
unusable heat. The Virgo Superconfederation, the main political unit at this stage
of history, gathered the last few megatons of usable resources aboard this station
so that at least one outpost of humanity could last long after all the planets had
succumbed. The station has been fulﬁlling its purpose for about a billion years
now, but we only have enough fuel left for another few weeks. After that, there's
no more negentropy left anywhere in the universe except our own bodies. I have
seen a month into the future. Nobody comes to save us.
For the past several trillion years, our best scientists have been investigating how
to reverse entropy and save the universe, or how to escape to a diﬀerent universe
in a lesser state of decay, or how to collect energy out of the waste heat which
now ﬁlls the vast majority of the sky. All of these tasks have been proven
impossible. There is no hope left, except for one thing.
It's impossible to see the future, even if it's only a month ahead. Somehow, our
black pill breaks the laws of physics. Despite having explored throughout the
cosmos, my people have found no alien species, nor any signs that such species
ever existed. Yet somebody made the black pill. If we understood that power,
maybe we could use it to save reality from its inevitable decay.
By sending this message back, I destroy my entire timeline. I do this in the hopes
that you, in the carefree springtime of the universe, will be able to ﬁnd the person
who made these pills and escape doom in the way we could not.
Yours truly,
You From Almost A Quadrillion Years In The Future
ACT TWO

Red
You hit the punching bag. It bursts, sending punching-bag-ﬁlling spraying all over the
room! You know that that would happen! It always happens when you hit a punching
bag! Your wife gets really angry and tells you that we don't have enough money to be
getting new punching bags all the time, but women hate it when you listen to what
they say! The Internet told you that!
The doorbell rings. You tear the door oﬀ its hinges instead of opening it, just to show it
who's boss. Standing on your porch is a man in black. He wears a black cloak, and his
face is hidden by a black hood. He raises a weapon towards you.
This looks like one of the approximately 100% of problems that can be solved by
BRUTE STRENGTH! You lunge at the man, but despite your super-speed, he steps out
of the way easily, even gracefully, as if he had known you were going to do that all
along. He squeezes the trigger. You jump out of the way, but it turns out to be more
into the way, as he has shot exactly where you were jumping into. Something seems
very odd about this. Your last conscious thought is that you wish you had enough
BRUTE STRENGTH to ﬁgure out what is going on.
Pink
You come home from work to a living room full of punching-bag-parts. Your husband
isn't home. You ﬁgure he knew you were going to chew him out for destroying another
punching bag, and decided to make himself scarce. That lasts right up until you go
into the kitchen and see a man dressed all in black, sitting at the table, as if he was
expecting you.
You panic, then reach in to touch him. If he's an axe murderer or something, you'll
seduce him, get him wrapped around your little ﬁnger, then order him to jump oﬀ a
cliﬀ to prove his love for you. It's nothing you haven't done before, though you don't
like to think about it too much.
Except that this man has no bare skin anywhere. His robe covers his entire body, and
even his hands are gloved. You try to reach in to touch his face, but he eﬀortlessly
manuevers away from you.
"I have your husband," he says, after you give up trying to enslave him with your
magic. "He's alive and in a safe place."
"You're lying!" you answer. "He never would have surrendered to anyone! He's too
alpha!"
The man nods. "I shot him with an elephant tranquilizer. He's locked up in a titanium
cell underneath ﬁfty feet of water. There's no way he can escape using BRUTE
STRENGTH. If you ever want to see him again, you'll have to do what I say."
"Why? Why are you doing this to me?" you say, crying.
"I need the allegiance of some very special people," he said. "They won't listen to me
just because I ask them to. But they might listen to me because you ask them to. I
understand you are pretty special yourself. Help me get who I want, and when we are
done here, I'll let you and your husband go."
There is ice in his voice. You shiver.

Grey
That night with the assassin was really scary. You swore you would never get involved
in King William's business again. Why are you even considering this?
"Please?" she said, with her big puppy dog eyes.
Oh, right. Her. She's not even all that pretty. Well, pretty, but not pretty pretty. But
somehow, when she touched you, it was like those movies where you hear a choir of
angels singing in the background. You would do anything she said. You know you
would.
"We need to know the layout of his palace compound," said the man in black. Was he
with her? Were they dating? If they were dating, you'll kill him. It doesn't matter how
creepy he is, you won't tolerate competition. But they're probably not dating. You
notice how he ﬂinches away from her, like he's afraid she might touch him.
"And it has to be me who helps?"
"I've, ah, simulated hundreds of diﬀerent ways of getting access to the King. None of
them hold much promise. His security is impeccable. Your special abilities are the only
thing that can help us."
You sit down at your terminal. The Internet is slow; DC still doesn't have ﬁber optic.
You've living here two years now, in a sort of retirement, ever since King William took
over Russia and knocked the bottom out of the Putin-annoying business. William now
controls the entire Old World, you hear, and is also Secretary-General of the United
Nations and Pope of both the Catholic and the Coptic Churches. The United States is
supposedly in a friendly coexistence with him, but you hear his supporters are gaining
more and more power in Congress.
It only takes a few minutes' work before you have the documents you need. "He
currently spends most of his time at the Rome compound," you say. "There are ﬁve
diﬀerent security systems. I can disable four of them. The last one is a complicated
combination of electrical and mechanical that's not hooked into any computer system
I'll be able to access. The only way to turn it oﬀ is from the control center, and the
control center is on the inside of the perimeter."
The man in black nods, as if he'd been expecting that. "Come with me," he says.
"We'll take care of it."
Blue
There are a hundred billion stars in the Milky Way. Each has an average of about one
planet - some have many more, but a lot don't have planets at all.
If you can explore one planet every half-hour - and you can, it doesn't take too long to
teleport to a planet, look around to see if there are plants and animals, and then move
on to the next one - it would take you ﬁve million years to rule out life on every planet
in the galaxy.
That's not practical. But, you think, life might spread. Life that originates on one
planet might end up colonizing nearby planets and star systems. That means your
best bet is to sample various regions of the galaxy, instead of going star by star.

That's what you've been doing. You must have seen about a hundred thousand
planets so far. Some of them have beggared your imagination. Whole worlds made
entirely of amethyst. Planets with dozens of colorful moons that make the night sky
look like a tree full of Christmas ornaments. Planets with black inky oceans or green
copper mountains.
But no life. No life anywhere.
A few years ago, you felt yourself losing touch with your humanity. You made yourself
promise that every year, you'd spend a week on Earth to remind yourself of the only
world you've ever seen with a population. Now it seems like an unpleasant task, an
annoying imposition. But then, that was why you made yourself promise. Because you
knew that future-you wouldn't do it unless they had to.
You teleport into a small Welsh hamlet. You've been away from other people so long,
you might as well start small. No point going right into Times Square.
A person is standing right next to you. She reaches out her arm and touches you. You
jump. How did she know you would -
"Hi," she says.
You're not a lesbian, but you can't help noticing she is the most beautiful person
you've ever seen, and you would do anything for her.
"I need your help." A man dressed all in black is standing next to her.
"You should help him," the most beautiful person you've ever seen tells you, and you
immediately know you will do whatever he asks.
Orange
You are in your study working on a draft version of next year's superweapon budget
when you hear the door open. Four people you don't recognize step into the room. A
man dressed in black. Another man wearing a grey shirt, thick glasses and is that a
pocket protector? A woman in pink, pretty but not pretty pretty. Another woman in
blue, who stares through you, like her mind is somewhere else. All ﬁve of your security
systems have been totally silent.
You press the button to call your bodyguards, but it's not working. So you draw the
gun out from under your desk and ﬁre; you happen to be a master marksman, but the
gun explodes in your face. You make a connection. A person from many years ago,
who had the power to control all technology.
No time to think now. You're on your feet; good thing you happen to be a black belt in
every form of martial arts ever invented. The man in grey is trying to take out a
weapon; you kick him in the gut before he can get it out, and he crumples over. You go
for the woman in blue, but at the last second she teleports to the other side of the
room. This isn't fair.
You are about to go after the woman in pink, but something in her step, something in
the position of the others makes you think they want you to attack her. You happen to
be a master at reading microexpressions, so this is clear as day to you; you go after
the man in black instead. He deftly sidesteps each of your attacks, almost as if he
knows what you are going to do before you do it.

The woman in blue teleports behind you and kicks you in the back, hard. You fall over,
and the woman in pink grabs your hand.
She is very, very beautiful. How did you miss that before? You feel a gush of horror
that you almost punched such a beautiful face.
"We need your help," she says.
You are too lovestruck to say anything.
"The pills," said the man in black. "Can you make them?"
"No," you say, truthfully. "Of course I tried. But I wouldn't even know where to begin
creating magic like that."
"And you've mastered all human jobs and activities," said the man in black. "Which
means the pills weren't created by any human."
"But there aren't any aliens," said the woman in blue. "Not in this galaxy, at least. I've
spent years looking. It's totally dead."
"It's just as I thought," said the man in black. He turns to you. "You're the Pope now,
right? Come with us. We're going to need you to get a guy in northern Italy to give us
something very important."
Yellow
It is spring, now. Your favorite time in the forest. The snow has melted, the wildﬂowers
have started to bloom, and the bears are coming out of hibernation. You're walking
down to the river when someone leaps out from behind a tree and touches you. You
scream, then suddenly notice how beautiful she is.
Four other people shuﬄe out from behind the trees. You think one of them might be
King William, the new world emperor, although that doesn't really make sense.
"You're probably wondering why I've called all of you together today..." said the man
in black. You're not actually wondering that, at least not in quite those terms, but the
woman in pink seems be listening intently so you do the same in the hopes of
impressing her.
"Somehow - and none of us can remember exactly how - each of us took a pill that
gave us special powers. Mine was to see the future. I saw to the end of time, and
received a message from the last people in the universe. They charged me with the
task of ﬁnding the people who created these pills and asking them how entropy might
be reversed.
But I couldn't do it alone. I knew there were seven other people who had taken pills.
One of us - Green - is dead. Another - Red - had nothing to contribute. The rest of us
are here. With the help of Pink, Blue, and Gray, we've enlisted the help of Orange and
his worldwide organization. Now we're ready for the ﬁnal stage of the plan. Yellow, you
can read anybody's mind from a picture, right?"
Yellow nods. "But it has to be a real photograph. I can't just draw a stick ﬁgure and say
it's the President and read his mind. I tried that."

Black is unfazed. "With the help of Orange, who among his many other
accomplishments is the current Pope, I have obtained the Shroud of Turin. A perfect
photographic representation of Jesus Christ, created by some unknown technology in
the ﬁrst century. And Jesus, I am told, is an incarnation of God."
"As the current Pope, I suppose I would have to agree with that assessment," says
Orange. "Though as the current UN Secretary General, I am disturbed by your
fanatical religious literalism."
"Orange can do anything that humans can do, and says he can't make the pills. Blue
has searched the whole galaxy, and says there aren't any aliens. That leaves only one
suspect. God must have made these pills, which means He must know how to do it. If
we can read His mind, we can steal his secrets."
"As Pope," says Orange, "I have to condemn this in the strongest possible terms. But
as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge, I have to admit I'm intrigued by
this opportunity to expand our knowledge."
Black ignores him. "Yellow, will you do the honors?"
You want no part in this. "This is insane. Every time I read someone's mind I regret it.
Even if it's a little kid or a bear or something. It's too much for me. I can't deal with all
of their guilt and sorrow and broken dreams and everything. There is no way I am
touching the mind of God Himself."
"Pleeeeeease?" asks Pink, with big puppy dog eyes.
"Um," you say.
"Don't you know how this will go, anyway?" asks Blue. "Why don't you just tell her
what happens?"
"Um," said Black. "This is actually the one thing I haven't been able to see. I guess
contact with God is inherently unpredictable, or something."
"I have such a bad feeling about this," you say.
"Pweeeeeeease?" says Pink. She actually says pweeeeeeease.
You sigh, take the shroud, and stare into the eyes of Weird Photographic Negative
Jesus.
Black
It is the year 963,445,028,777,216 AD, and here you are in a space station orbiting
the Galactic Core.
After handing Yellow the Shroud of Turin, the next thing you remember is waking up in
a hospital bed. The doctor tells you that you'd been in a coma for the past forty one
years.
Apparently Yellow went totally berserk after reading God's mind. You don't know the
details and you don't want to, but she immediately lashed out and used her
superpowers to turn oﬀ the minds of everybody within radius, including both you and
herself. You all went comatose, and probably would have starved to death in the
middle of the forest if Orange's supporters hadn't launched a worldwide manhunt for

him. They took his body and the bodies of his friends back to Rome, where they were
given the best possible medical care while a steward ruled over his empire.
After forty-one years of that, Yellow had a heart attack and died, breaking the spell
and freeing the rest of you. Except Blue and Grey. They'd died as well. It was just you,
Orange, and Pink now.
Oh, and Red. You'd hired a friend to watch over him in his titanium jail cell, and once it
became clear you were never coming back, he'd had mercy and released the guy. Red
had since made a meager living selling the world's worst body-building videos, which
were so bad they had gained a sort of ironic popularity. You tracked him down, and
when Pink saw him for the ﬁrst time in over forty years, she ran and embraced him.
He hugged her back. It took them a few hours of fawning over each other before she
realized that nothing had happened when she touched him a second time. Something
something true love something the power was within you the whole time?
But you had bigger ﬁsh to fry. The stewards of Orange's empire weren't too happy
about their ﬁgurehead monarch suddenly rising from the dead, and for a while his
position was precarious. He asked you to be his advisor, and you accepted. With your
help, he was able to retake his throne. His ﬁrst act was to fund research into the
immortality serum you had heard about, which was discovered right on schedule in
2060.
The years went by. Orange's empire started colonizing new worlds, then new galaxies,
until thousands of years later it changed its name to the Virgo Superconfederation.
New people were born. New technologies were invented. New frontiers were
conquered. Until ﬁnally, the stars started going out one by one.
Faced with the impending heat death, Orange elected to concentrate all his remaining
resources here, on a single station in the center of the galaxy, which would wait out
the ﬁnal doom as long as possible. For billions of years, it burned through its fuel
stockpile, until the ﬁnal doom crept closer and closer.
And then a miracle occurred.
EPILOGUE
Red
This space station is AWESOME! There are lasers and holodecks and lots of HOT
PUSSY! And all you have to do is turn a giant turbine for a couple of hours a day.
One of the eggheads in white coats tried to explain it to you once. He said that your
BRUTE STRENGTH was some kind of scientiﬁc impossibility, because you didn't eat or
drink any more than anyone else, and you didn't breathe in any more oxygen than
anyone else, and you were actually kind of small and scrawny, but you were still
strong enough and fast enough to turn a giant turbine thousands of times per minute.
He rambled on and on about thermodynamics. Said that every other process in the
universe used at most as much energy as you put into it, but that your strength
seemed almost limitless regardless of how much energy you took in as food. That
made you special, somehow. It made you a "novel power source" that could operate
"independently of external negentropy". You weren't sure what any of that meant, and
honestly the scientist seemed sort of like a BETA CUCKOLD ORBITER to you. But

whatever was going on, they'd promised you that if you turned this turbine every day,
you could have all the HOT PUSSY you wanted and be SUPER ALPHA.
You'd even met the head honcho once, a guy named King William. He told you that
some of the energy you produced was going to power the station, but that the rest
was going into storage. That over billions and billions of years, they would accumulate
more and more stored negentropy, until it was enough to restart the universe. That it
would be a cycle - a newborn universe lasting a few billion years, collapsing into a
dark period when new negentropy had to be accumulated, followed by another
universe again.
It all sounded way above your head. But one thing stuck with you. As he was leaving,
the King remarked that it was ironic that when the black hole harvesters and
wormholes and tachyon capacitors had all failed, it was a random really strong guy
who had saved them.
You had always known, deep down, that BRUTE STRENGTH was what was really
important. And here, at the end of all things, it is deeply gratifying to ﬁnally be proven
right.

