
Babble and Prune
1. Babble
2. More Babble
3. Prune
4. Circumambulation
5. Write

Babble
This is a linkpost for https://radimentary.wordpress.com/2018/01/10/babble/
This post is an exercise in "identifying with the algorithm." I'm a big fan of the
probabilistic method and randomized algorithms, so my biases will show.
How do human beings produce knowledge? When we describe rational thought
processes, we tend to think of them as essentially deterministic, deliberate, and
algorithmic. After some self-examination, however, I've come to think that my process
is closer to babbling many random strings and later ﬁltering by a heuristic. I think
verbally, and my process for generating knowledge is virtually indistinguishable from
my process for generating speech, and also quite similar to my process for generating
writing.
Here's a simplistic model of how this works. I try to build a coherent sentence. At each
step, to pick the next word, I randomly generate words in the category (correct part of
speech, relevance) and sound them out one by one to see which continues the
sentence most coherently. So, instead of deliberately and carefully generating
sentences in one go, the algorithm is something like:
1. Babble. Use a weak and local ﬁlter to randomly generate a lot of possibilities. Is
the word the right part of speech? Does it lie in the same region of thingspace?
Does it ﬁt the context?
2. Prune. Use a strong and global ﬁlter to test for the best, or at least a
satisfactory, choice. With this word in the blank, do I actually believe this
sentence? Does the word have the right connotations? Does the whole thought
read smoothly?
This is a babble about embracing randomness.
Baby Babble
Research on language development suggests that baby babble is an direct forerunner
to language. You might imagine that infants learn by imitation, and that baby babble
is just an imperfect imitation of words the baby hears, and progress occurs as they
physiologically adapt to better produce those sounds. You would be wrong.
Instead, infants are initially capable of producing all the phonemes that exist in all
human languages, and they slowly prune out which ones they need via reinforcement
learning. Based on the sounds that their parents produce and respond to, babies
slowly ﬁlter out unnecessary phonemes. Their babbles begin to drift as they prune out
more and more phonemes, and they start to combine syllables into proto-words.
Babble is the process of generating random sounds, and looking for clues about which
ones are useful. Something something reinforcement learning partially observable
Markov decision process I'm in over my head.
So, we've learned that babies use the Babble and Prune algorithm to learn language.
But this is quite a general algorithm, and evolution is a conservative force. It stands to
reason that human beings might learn other things by a similar algorithm. I don't think
it's a particularly controversial suggestion that human thought proceeds roughly by

cheaply constructing a lot of low-resolution hypotheses and then sieving from them by
allowing them to play out to their logical conclusions.
The point I want to emphasize is that the algorithm has two distinct phases, both of
which can be independently optimized. The stricter and stronger your Prune ﬁlter, the
higher quality content you stand to produce. But one common bug is related to this: if
the quality of your Babble is much lower than that of your Prune, you may end up with
nothing to say. Everything you can imagine saying or writing sounds cringey or
content-free. Ten minutes after the conversation moves on from that topic, your
Babble generator ﬁnally returns that witty comeback you were looking for. You'll
probably spend your entire evening waiting for an opportunity to force it back in.
Your pseudorandom Babble generator can also be optimized, and in two diﬀerent
ways. On the one hand, you can improve the weak ﬁlter you're using, to increase the
probability of generating higher-quality thoughts. The other way is one of the things
named "creativity": you can try to eliminate systematic biases in the Babble
generator, with the eﬀect of hitting a more uniform subset of relevant concept-space.
Exercises that might help include expanding your vocabulary, reading outside your
comfort zone, and engaging in the subtle art of nonstandard sentence construction.
Poetry is Babble Study
Poetry is at its heart an isolation exercise for your Babble generator. When creating
poetry, you replace your complex, inarticulate, and highly optimized Prune ﬁlter with a
simple, explicit, and weird one that you're not attached to. Instead of picking words
that maximize meaning, relevance, or social signals, you pick words with the right
number of syllables that rhyme correctly and follow the right meter.
Now, with the Prune ﬁlter simpliﬁed and ﬁxed, all the attention is placed on the
Babble. What does it feel like to write a poem (not one of those free-form modern
ones)? Probably most of your eﬀort is spent Babbling almost-words that ﬁt the meter
and rhyme scheme. If you're anything like me, it feels almost exactly like playing a
game of Scrabble, ﬁtting letters and syllables onto a board by trial and error. Scrabble
is just like poetry: it's all about being good at Babble. And no, I graciously decline to
write poetry in public, even though Scrabble does conveniently rhyme with Babble.
Puns and word games are Babble. You'll notice that when you Babble, each new word
isn't at all independent from its predecessors. Instead, Babble is more like initiating a
random walk in your dictionary, one letter or syllable or inferential step at a time.
That's why word ladders are so appealing - because they stem from a natural
cognitive algorithm. I think Scott Alexander's writing quality is great partly because
of his love of puns, a sure sign he has a great Babble generator.
If poetry and puns are phonetic Babble, then "Deep Wisdom" is semantic Babble.
Instead of randomly arranging words by sound, we're arranging a rather small set of
words to sound wise. More often than not, "deep wisdom" boils down to word games
anyway, e.g. wise old sayings:
"A blind person who sees is better than a seeing person who is blind."
"A proverb is a short sentence based on long experience."
"Economy is the wealth of the poor and the wisdom of the rich."

Reading is Outsourcing Babble
Reading and conversation outsource Babble to others. Instead of using your own
Babble generator, you ﬂood your brain with other people's words, and then apply your
Prune ﬁlter. Because others have already Pruned once, the input is particularly high-
quality Babble, and you reap particularly beautiful fruit. How many times have you
read a thousand-page book, only to ﬁxate on a handful of striking lines or passages?
Prune goes into overdrive when you outsource Babble. A bug I mentioned earlier is
having way too strict of a Prune ﬁlter, compared to the quality of your Babble. This
occurs particularly to people who read and listen much more than they write or speak.
When they ﬁnally trudge into the attic and turn on that dusty old Babble generator, it
doesn't produce thoughts nearly as coherent, witty, or wise as their hyper-developed
Prune ﬁlter is used to processing.
Impose Babble tariﬀs. Your conversation will never be as dry and smart as something
from a sitcom. If you can't think of anything to say, relax your Prune ﬁlter at least
temporarily, so that your Babble generator can catch up. Everyone starts somewhere -
Babbling platitudes is better than being silent altogether.
Conversely, some people have no ﬁlter, and these are exactly the kind of people who
don't read or listen enough. If all your Babble goes directly to your mouth, you need to
install a better Prune ﬁlter. Impose export tariﬀs.
The reason the Postmodernism Generator is so fun to read is because computers are
now capable of producing great Babble. Reading poetry and randomly generated
postmodernism, talking to chatbots, these activities all amount to frolicking in the
uncanny valley between Babble and the Pruned.
Tower of Babble
A wise man once said, "Do not build Towers out of Babble. You wouldn't build one out
of Pizza, would you?"
NP
NP is the God of Babble. His law is: humans will always be much better at verifying
wisdom than producing it. Therefore, go forth and Babble! After all, how did
Shakespeare write his famous plays, except by randomly pressing keys on a
keyboard?
NP has a little brother called P. The law of P is: never try things you don't understand
completely. Randomly thrashing around will get you nowhere.
P believes himself to be a God, an equal to his brother. He is not.

More Babble
This is a linkpost for https://radimentary.wordpress.com/2018/01/11/more-babble/
In my last babble, I introduced the Babble and Prune model of thought generation:
Babble with a weak heuristic to generate many more possibilities than necessary,
Prune with a strong heuristic to ﬁnd a best, or the satisfactory one. I want to zoom in
on this model. If the last babble was colored by my biases as a probabilist, this one is
motivated by my biases as a graph theorist.
First, I will speculate on the exact mechanism of Babble, and also highlight the fact
Babble and Prune are independent systems that can be mocked out for unit testing.
Second, I will lather on some metaphors about the adversarial nature of Babble and
Prune. Two people have independently mentioned Generative Adversarial Networks to
me, a model of unsupervised learning involving two neural nets, Generator and
Discriminator. The Artist and the Critic are archetypes of the same ﬂavor - I have
argued in the past the spirit of the Critic is Satan.
Babble is (Sampling From) PageRank
Previously, I suggested that a Babble generator is a pseudorandom word generator,
weighted with a weak, local ﬁlter. This is roughly true, but spectacular fails one of the
technical goals of a pseudorandom generator: independence. In particular, the next
word you Babble is frequently a variation (phonetically or semantically) of the
previous one.
PageRank, as far as I know, ranks web pages by the heuristic of "what is the
probability of ending up at this page after a random walk with random restarts." That's
why a better analogy for Babble is sampling from PageRank i.e. taking a weighted
random walk in your Babble graph with random restarts. Jackson Pollock is visual
Babble.
Imagine you're playing a game of Scrabble, and you have the seven letters JRKAXN.
What does your algorithm feel like?
You scan the board and see an open M. You start Babbling letter combinations that
might start with M: MAJR, MRAJ, MRAN, MARN, MARX (oops, proper noun), MARK
(great!). That's the weighted random walk. You set MARK aside and look for another
place to start.
Time for a restart. You ﬁnd an open A before a Triple Word, that'd be great to get! You
start Babbling combinations that end with A: NARA, NAXRA, JARA, JAKA, RAKA. No luck.
Maybe the A should be in the middle of the word! ARAN, AKAN, AKAR, AJAR (great!).
You sense mean stares for taking so long, so you turn oﬀ the Babble and score AJAR
for (1+8+1+1)x3 = 33 points. Not too shabby.
The Babble Graph

Last time, I described getting better at Babble as increasing the uniformity of your
pseudorandom Babble generator. With a higher-resolution model of Babble in hand,
we should reconceptualize increasing uniformity as building a well-connected Babble
graph.
What is the Babble graph? It's the graph within which your words and concepts are
connected. Some of these connections are by rhyme and visual similarity, others are
semantic or personal. Blood and snow are connected in my Babble graph, for
example, because in Chinese they are homophones: snow is 雪 (xue), and blood is ⾎
(xue). This led to the following paragraph from one of my high school essays
(paraphrased):
In Chinese, snow and blood sound the same: "xue." Some people think the world
will end suddenly in nuclear holocaust, pandemic, or a belligerent SkyNet. I think
the world will die slowly and painfully, bleeding to death one drop at a time with
each New England winter.
My parents had recently dragged me out to jog in the melting post-blizzard slush.
One of my favorite classes in college was a game theory class taught by the wonderful
David Parkes; my wife and I lovingly remember the class as Parkes and Rec. One of
the striking ideas I learned in Parkes and Rec is that exponentially large graphs can be
compactly represented implicitly in memory, as long as individual edges and
neighborhoods can be computed in reasonable time. Babble is capable of generating
new words and combinations, so the Babble graph contains nodes you've never
thought of. It's enormous, and deﬁnitely not (a subgraph of) the connectome, but
rather implicitly represented therein in a compact way. This is related to the fact that
the map is not the territory, except in the study of the brain, where the map is a
subset of the territory.
It follows that the Babble graph is a massive implicitly represented graph, which is
traversed via random walks with random restarts. How might we optimize this data
structure to better fulﬁll its goals?
One technique I've already mentioned is to artiﬁcially replace either Babble or Prune
to train the other in isolation. This is basically unit testing via mocking. To unit test
Babble, we can mock out Prune with a simpliﬁed and explicit ﬁlter like the haiku, the
game of Scrabble, or word games like Contact and Convergence. To unit test Prune,
we replace Babble with other sources of word strings: reading, conversation, poetry,
music.
Those methods completely black box the Babble and Prune algorithms and hope they
self-optimize correctly. What if we want to get our hands dirty and explicitly rewire our
Babble graph?
First we have to ﬁgure out what makes a quality Babble graph. I can think of two
metrics worth optimizing:
1. Connectivity. With suﬃcient eﬀort (i.e. taking enough random steps and restarts)
you want to eventually explore the entire graph, and repeat yourself rarely. This
requires not just that the graph is connected, but that it should have good
expansion. Ever feel stuck on an idea, then be struck by external inspiration to
explore a disconnected set of ideas you already knew, and ﬁnd it massively

productive? Random walks getting trapped locally is a sign your Babble graph is
a bad expander.
2. Value. Every node in your Babble graph should pay rent. I have found many
abandoned components in my Babble graph - ghost towns and wastelands of
neural machinery left over from experiences that are no longer relevant. They
can be salvaged and repurposed, if only to generate metaphors.
Ramanujan was an extraordinarily creative mathematician who produced formulas like
p(n) ∼
exp π√
for the number of partitions p(n) of an integer n. Exercise: ﬁgure out how such an
exponent might occur in nature. Hint: ζ(2) = π2/6.
Ramanujan was also known for his mysticism, attributing his most inspired results to
his patron goddess. Mystical experiences, like LSD, are often characterized by the
feeling of connectedness of all things. I think Ramanujan's genius might be the result
of having a Babble graph that is an exceptionally good expander. What are those
called again?
Here's a story about how I improved my Babble graph by making my bed.
It all started when Jordan Peterson told me to clean my room - because one's
surroundings are a reﬂection of one's state of being. I decided to give it a chance and
make my bed every morning.
Making my bed became a daily ritual. As I do it, I repeat the "proper and humble"
mantra:
To save the world, I will start by doing the proper and humble things I know how to do
within the conﬁnes of my own life.
Proper and humble were not words I'd liked in a very long time. They activated ideas I
haven't wrestled with for years.
Honte is a Go term which means "the proper move." Honte is playing thickly to leave
few weaknesses. Honte is killing already dead stones to remove aji. Honte is doing the
proper and humble thing to prevent bad aji - failure modes you can't yet articulate.
There's nothing quite like playing Go against a stronger player to put the fear of aji in
you.
In relationships, honte is dedication to the removal of lingering resentment. Unhappy
couples have the same ﬁghts at regular intervals; the landmines that trigger them
might lay untouched for upwards of a year, but they never deactivate. Why would you
allow these landmines be planted in the ﬁrst place? You wouldn't leave a ladder
breaker for your opponent in an unapproached corner, would you? Dedicate yourself
to the removal of landmines, at least when you have the slack to do so. That's honte.
A well-connected and useful Babble graph is thickness (not to be confused with
thiccness). It is written: attack from thickness. When thinking from a thick Babble
1
4n√3
2n
3

graph, you're not wandering lackadaisically, building an argument from scraps lying at
the side of the trail. You'll have the weight of your entire intellectual life at your back.
The Artist and the Critic
Two people have independently suggested that the Babble and Prune model is similar
to an approach in machine learning known as Generative Adversarial Networks, in
which production of photorealistic images (say) is turned into a game between two
neural nets, Generator, who learns to generate good counterfeits, and Discriminator,
who works on ﬁnding the real stuﬀ.
This is a manifestation of the eternal war between the Artist and the Critic, a war that
is both exceedingly vicious and exceedingly productive. Artists of the ages have had
some choice words for their critics. Beckett:
VLADIMIR
Moron!
ESTRAGON
That's the idea, let's abuse each other.
They turn, move apart, turn again and face each other.
VLADIMIR
Moron!
ESTRAGON
Vermin!
VLADIMIR
Abortion!
ESTRAGON
Morpion!
VLADIMIR
Sewer-rat!
ESTRAGON
Curate!
VLADIMIR
Cretin!
ESTRAGON
(with ﬁnality) Crritic!
VLADIMIR
Oh!
He wilts, vanquished, and turns away.
The opening lines of Hardy's A Mathematician's Apology:
It is a melancholy experience for a professional mathematician to
ﬁnd himself writing about mathematics. The function of a
mathematician is to do something, to prove new theorems, to add
to mathematics, and not to talk about what he or other mathematicians
have done. Statesmen despise publicists, painters despise
art-critics, and physiologists, physicists, or mathematicians have
usually similar feelings: there is no scorn more profound, or on
the whole more justiﬁable, than that of the men who make for the
men who explain. Exposition, criticism, appreciation, is work for
second-rate minds.

I have a rule inspired by Solzhenitsyn, which is that every battle which occurs
between human beings also plays out within each human heart. The proper locus of
the ﬁght between Artist and Critic is not cleanly between artists and critics, but
between the Babble and Prune within each individual. After all, ﬁnd me an artist who
has never criticized, or a great critic who is never enjoyable to read for his own sake.
Exercise: get some utility out of a bad book you've recently read by checking out the
savage reviews online.
Like Generator and Discriminator, a good Artist and Critic pair can together ascend to
heights that neither could reach alone, and having a ﬁlter is a healthy thing. However,
I stand by my argument that the overdeveloped Critic is a manifestation of Satan:
Jordan Peterson says Satan is an intellectual ﬁgure, and this idea has fermented in
my imagination. Satan is the cynical and nihilistic intellectual whose thesis is
"things are so bad they do not deserve to exist."
[...]
I would propose an embellishment of the ﬁgure of Satan as the nihilistic
intellectual: Satan as the critic. One of the (many) disturbing things I have noticed
about my high school curriculum is that English classes are factories for creating
critics out of artists. At least in my experience, we wrote short stories, poems, and
other free form essays in elementary and middle school, but turned exclusively to
the analytical essay by the time high school rolled around.
How frightening is that? Take a generation of teenagers, present them with the
greatest literature of our civilization. Then, instead of teaching them to do the
obvious thing - imitate - we teach them to analyze - the derivative work of a
critic.  The work of Satan: the intellectual whose ability to criticize far exceeds his
ability to create. And so we ﬁnd that the best students to come out of our high
schools are created in the image of Satan. For every one budding novelist, we
have a dozen teenage journalists, lawyers, and activists.
Satan is the voice in your ear who says, "You will never do this well enough for it
to be worth doing." This is the burrowing anxiety that puts me oﬀ writing for
weeks at at time, the anxiety that anything I produce will not justify its own
existence. The subroutine in your head constantly constructing impossibly high
standards and handing them to you to use as excuses to do nothing. Satan is
characterized by inaction, the inaction caused by paralyzing perfectionism.
Other Things that are Babble
The Bible is the best Babble ever produced. A common atheist refrain is that the Bible
is so self-contradictory, so ambiguous, so open to interpretation as to be intrinsically
meaningless. Any meaning you might extract from the Bible is just a reﬂection of your
own beliefs.
I think this is a feature, not a bug.
Not only is the Bible open to interpretation, it invites interpretation. Its stories are so
varied, fantastical and morally ambiguous that they demand interpretation. The Bible
stood the test of time not because it is maximally packed with wisdom, but because it
produced the most insightful and varied results when paired with outside sources of
Prune. When the Christian is lost and desperate, he inputs 1 Corinthians to his Prune,
and voilà! Faith is restored. Peterson's The Psychological Signiﬁcance of the
Bible series takes advantage of exactly this feature of the Bible: it is the fertile ground

upon which each individual can tell their own story. Of course, perversions can result
when broken Prune ﬁlters are applied, even to the best Babble.
Perhaps writers have been optimizing for the wrong thing. Instead of directly packing
insight into an essay, we should try to design high-quality Babble, fertile input for the
reader's Prune.
The Oulipo is Babble training on steroids - a group of writers and mathematicians who
worked based on the apparent paradox that freedom is the enemy of creativity.
Creativity, the state of having a better Babble generator, is designed to solve tough,
heavily constrained problems, and the Oulipians produced creative writing by
imposing stricter restraints. Most famously, this method produced Perec's novel La
disparition, a 300-page novel written without the letter 'e,' about "a group of
individuals looking for a missing companion, Anton Vowl."
By the way, did you notice the letter missing from this entire post?
All good conversations are therapeutic, and therapeutic conversations are about
letting down your guard and allowing yourself to simply Babble. Babies have no Prune
at all and babble all the phonemes their adorable little mouths can produce - that's
how they learn the beginnings of language so quickly. Being in a safe space is
reproducing this state of development, a place where Babble can be rapidly be
optimized on its own terms. Healthy teamwork and collaboration shares this quality:
bouncing half-formed, half-nonsensical ideas oﬀ others and Pruning them together.
Double the Babble, double the fun.
Oh, and about that missing letter? Just kidding. Ain't nobody got time for that.

Prune
This is a linkpost for https://radimentary.wordpress.com/2018/01/12/prune/
Previously, I described human thought-generation as an adversarial process between
a low-quality pseudorandom Babble generator and a high-quality Prune ﬁlter, roughly
analogous to the Generative Adversarial Networks model in machine learning. I
then elaborated on this model by reconceptualizing Babble as a random walk with
random restarts on an implicitly stored Babble graph.
Rationalist training (and schooling in general) slants towards developing Prune over
Babble. I'm trying to solve the dual problem: that of improving the quality of your
Babble.
Although the previous posts listed a number of exotic isolation exercises for Babble,
I'm guessing nobody was inspired to go out and play more Scrabble, write haikus, or
stop using the letter 'e'. That's probably for the best - taking these exercises too
seriously would produce exotic but sub-optimal Babble anyway. For a serious solution
to this serious problem, we need to understand Prune at a higher resolution.
The main problem with Prune is that it has too many layers. There's a ﬁlter for
subconscious thoughts to become conscious, another for it to become spoken word,
another for the spoken word to be written down, and a further one for the written
word to be displayed in public. With this many-layer model in mind, there are plenty of
knobs to turn to let more and better Babble through.
The River of Babble
Imagine that your river of Babble at its source, the subconscious: a foaming, ugly-
colored river littered with half-formed concepts, too wild to navigate, too dirty to drink
from. A quarter mile across, the bellow of the rapids is deafening.
Downstream, you build a series of gates to tame the rushing rapids and perhaps
extract something beautiful and pure.
The First Gate, conscious thought, is a huge dam a thousand feet high and holds
almost all the incoming thoughts at bay. Behind it, an enormous lake forms,
threatening to overﬂow at any moment. A thick layer of trash ﬂoats to the top of this
lake, intermixed with a fair amount of the good stuﬀ. The First Gate lets through
anything that satisﬁes a bare minimum of syntactical and semantic constraints.
Thoughts that make it past the First Gate are the ﬁrst ones you become conscious of -
that's why they call the output the Stream of Consciousness.
A mile down the Stream of Consciousness is the Second Gate, spoken word, the ﬁlter
through which thoughts become sounds. This Gate keeps you from saying all the
foolish or risqué thoughts tripping through your head. Past the Second Gate, your
spoken words form only a pathetic trickle - a Babbling Brook.
By now there is hardly anything left to sift from. The Third Gate, written word, is no
physical gate but a team of goldpanners, scattered down the length of the Babbling
Brook to pan for jewels and nuggets of gold. Such rare beauties are the only Babble

that actually make it onto paper. You hoard these little trinkets in your personal diary
or blog, hoping one day to accumulate enough to forge a beautiful necklace.
Past the Third Gate, more Gates lay unused because there simply isn't enough
material to fuel them: a whole chain of manufactories passed down from the great
writers of yore. Among them are the disembodied voices of Strunk and White:
Omit needless words. Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should contain no
unnecessary words, a paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason
that a drawing should have no unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary
parts. This requires not that the writer make all his sentences short, or that he
avoid all detail and treat his subjects only in outline, but that every word tell.
Jealously clutching the 500-word pearls you drop once a month on your blog, you
dream of the day when the capital comes through and these Gates will be activated to
produce your magnum opus, your great American novel. For now, you can't aﬀord to
omit a single precious word.
The Gates of Prune
In the model above, there are many problems with Prune independent of having low-
quality Babble to begin with. The Gates are working at odds with each other. They are
individually too strict. There are simply too many of them. Lots of expensive mental
machinery is not working at full capacity, if at all: if you have four Gates but 99% of
the goods don't make it through the ﬁrst one, that novel-writing factory you've built is
not paying rent.
Even worse, there's probably two or three layers of subtlety within each of the big
Gates I sketched. What you might whisper on a dark night in total solitude is diﬀerent
from what you might utter to a conﬁdante is diﬀerent from what you might say to your
thesis adviser.
If a balanced Babble and Prune game is supposed to involve one Artist against one
Critic, then having an overactive Prune is like pitting a pitchfork-wielding mob of
Critics against one Artist. The ﬁrst three Critics tar-and-feather the Artist and the rest
are just there for moral support.
The task of relaxing all of Prune at once is monumental. Instead, relax the Gates
individually in order. Simultaneously, shorten the psychological distance between
them.
Relaxing and Shortening
At the First Gate, conscious thought, noticing is the way to let through more
subconscious Babble. Practice noticing thoughts and sensations (not just confusion)
that you never pay attention to. Much of meditation is devoted to relaxing this ﬁrst
Prune ﬁlter. Much of art is devoted to the motto: make the familiar strange, where
strange is better translated as salient.
Another exercise along similar lines is zooming in on anything, anything at all. Pick up
and stare at the whorls and aphids running down that twig on your driveway. Take

apart that broken old Canon in the attic. Dissect your aversions toward attending
Algebraic Geometry.
At the Second Gate, spoken word, the trick is getting comfortable with vocalizing more
of your Stream of Consciousness. I mentioned before that my internal process is very
verbal - on reﬂection I think that whole post is about the maturation of my Prune ﬁlter
to allow more Babble through. Several features stand out.
One of these features is that I directly mouth or whisper any thoughts that appear in
my Stream of Consciousness. Psychologically, this shortens the distance between the
First Gate and the Second Gate: it becomes a question of how loud to speak rather
than whether or not to speak at all. There's no reason not to be constantly mouthing
the things you're thinking, at least when you're alone. Similarly, when lost in thought I
make micro-gestures with my ﬁngers to imitate the emphatic ones I would make to
convey that point in conversation. These tricks exploit the fact that the psychological
distance between 1% and 100% is much shorter than that between 0% and 100%.
Another feature of my internal process is that I always have a mental audience: a
silent judgmental muse, the personiﬁcation of the Critic. In HPMOR, Harry has a
supersized version of this: a whole cast of colorful mental characters that carry out
full-length conversations with each other. This kind of dissociation-into-
subpersonalities exercise has a whole of great side eﬀects, but the relevant one for us
is that it again shortens the mental gap between the First and Second Gate by
making thinking feel like conversation.
Onwards to the Third Gate: the written word. Thankfully, modern technology has
already radically shortened the distance between the Second and Third Gates for us
with the invention of the blog, a medium much more free-form and personal than the
book. Your training as a writer has probably erected a tall Third Gate, and successful
bloggers have pretty much circumvented it.
What distinguishes blogging from formal writing? One metric is the frequency with
which the blogger breaks the Fourth Wall - that poor Wall which is only mentioned
when it is broken. Having torn down the Fourth Wall, blogging reduces naturally to a
heated and cogent form of conversation, ﬁlled with rhetorical questions and
injunctions.
Hey, look here, I'm not saying there's no place whatsoever in writing for formality. But
if you're going to build a wall and call it the Fourth Wall, build it after the Third Gate,
you know?

Circumambulation
This is a linkpost for
https://radimentary.wordpress.com/2018/01/15/circumambulation/
This is Part 4 of the Babble and Prune sequence.
In the previous parts, I described the brain's thought-generation process as an
adversarial learning system between Babble - which generates low-quality content -
and Prune - which ﬁlters for high-quality content.
My primary motivation for understanding this system is to solve writer's block. On
some days, I achieve a state of ﬂow and write two thousand lucid words in two hours,
which somehow coalesce a previously disconnected body of thoughts. On others, I
give up after one or two navel-gazing abortions. These irregularities are a sign that my
model of Babble and Prune is insuﬃciently predictive.
Babble and Prune are part of the picture, and a conscious eﬀort of systematically
relaxing the lower Gates of Prune has helped me produce more material. However,
there's at least one important point which is entirely missing in this model: the choice
of subject matter, the focus of one's attention towards which Babble and Prune
approach.
Today I will ﬁt Babble and Prune into another piece of the puzzle: Circumambulation -
walking around the truth, spiraling towards it.
Truth is a process of successive approximation. More precisely: truth is a process of
circumambulation. Deep truths are not mere point masses on a line to be approached
with binary search or gradient descent. They are sprawling manifolds in high-
dimensional space, and to map out such a Titan requires patience, false starts, and
approach from many directions.
Circumambulation is the underlying directive of Babble, the process of circling around
the holes in your understanding to pin down their shape and ﬁll them in with
substance.
1. Circumambulation
From Jung:
I began to understand that the goal of psychic development is the self.
There is no linear evolution; there is only a circumambulation of the self. Uniform
development exists, at most, at the beginning; later, everything points toward the
centre.
This insight gave me stability, and gradually my inner peace returned.
This quote is accompanied by the lovely picture of one of the labyrinths found in many
cathedrals. Classically, cathedrals are built in the shape of a cross, e.g. Notre Dame:

At the center of the cross (X marks the spot) is the labyrinth. Walking the labyrinth is a
ritual reﬂecting on the nonlinearity with which we circle the truth.


Our imagery for reality is deeply tied to our spatial reasoning. Metaphors like map and
territory, thingspace, and pendulums make instinctive sense by tapping into this
connection. New knowledge is produced by honing in on holes in the map, and then
ﬁlling them in by surveying the territory.
The map can be a very twisted and high-dimensional thing full of holes and jumps,
and Babble is a biased random walk like simulated annealing on this space.
Babble is the process of randomly walking around the map, honing in on beacons,
holes, and discontinuities. These are (at least) three diﬀerent ways in which something
can be missing from the map. Properly done, Babble can detect all of them.
i. Beacons
A beacon attracts attention. Like the summit of a mountain or the base of a valley, it
has the feel of a local optimum. Circumambulation in known regions of the map spiral
inevitably into beacons - recurring thoughts and preoccupations.
Beacons signal there is more to the story - the single marker on the map that you
knew lazily as "procrastination" is actually a whole category of distinct mental
phenomena. Once a beacon is identiﬁed, it needs to be blown up because there is too
much information to be stored at a point. Imagine surgically expanding the beacon
into a whole bubble of space.
Newcomb's problem is still a beacon for me. Every time I wander into its general
region, I add a bit of detail to my understanding. I gain a little more respect for
credible precommitment and iterated games and a little more certainty of one-boxing
in superﬁcially Newcomb-like problems in real life. Nevertheless, a beacon of residual
unease remains.
ii. Holes
Holes in the map are gaps in your knowledge and models. You can infer the existence
of simple and low-dimensional holes locally - they are usually marked by weak
beacons. Knowing plenty about how baby humans develop, you infer that there is just
as much detail to learn about crocodiles. Babble can sometimes lead you to ﬁll in
these simple holes out of curiosity, and ﬁnd out that crocodile gender is determined
by the temperature of the egg. Nevertheless, you don't have time to ﬁll in all the little
gaps.
Big gaps in your knowledge may be so big you don't even know they exist. If you walk
in a straight line while staring at your feet, you'll miss most of the serious holes in the
map. That's the value of circumambulation: detecting holes more globally when local
detection is diﬃcult or impossible.
The map may be a hollow sphere (or worse, a ﬂat torus) that needs to be ﬁlled in.
Walking around myopically, you think you live in Flatland. But if you Circumambulate
mindfully, you might notice your Babble looks like this:
Detecting that three right angles don't make a triangle, you notice that your map has
positive curvature, and there might be important insight at the center of this spherical

hole you've been skirting around. Insight that you couldn't have found by walking in
straight lines.
iii. Discontinuities
The confusion you notice as you Babble can signal holes in your knowledge, but it can
also mean there are inaccuracies in what is already there. Figuring out what to do with
a note of confusion is a delicate science. That slight pain in your chest - is it heartburn
or lung cancer?
You make a circle around the concept, only to end up not where you started. Maybe
it's a sign of a hole, or lack of precision. You think the map is a circle, but actually it's a
covering space thereof, i.e. a much bigger circle. Your models are not suﬃciently
precise to distinguish subtle diﬀerences between points in the same ﬁber. It might
also be the sign of a discontinuity, an internal contradiction in your map. Imagine the
dismay of a cartographer who tries to build an atlas based on Columbus' reports of
reaching India, unaware of the entire New World.
Discontinuities can be global just like holes, and require global solutions, and to
rebuild models from scratch for a single discontinuity is usually too expensive.
Identifying and eliminating these systematic biases - or at least correcting for them -
is a central rationalist project.
2. Circumambulation as Battle Royale
Previously, I compared Babble to sampling from Google's PageRank algorithm: taking
random walks on the Babble graph with random restarts. The randomness is biased by
a weak, local heuristic.
But however useful PageRank is, it's only once in a blue moon that someone wants a
global list of all extant web pages sorted by popularity. Google needs a search term
and ﬁlters to be useful. Similarly, every Babble walk has to start at a basepoint, and
it's less random than I suggested.
Narrowing down to a central truth is like a game of Battle Royale. Initially, many
diﬀerent hypotheses are spawned all over the map and fan out in pseudo-random
walks. However, as Babble generates hypotheses and some of them are Pruned, we
begin to triangulate the coordinates of the center. The safe area shrinks.

Babble is produced starting from a basepoint and restricted to a general region. As a
clearer picture of the center is developed via Babble and Prune, the basepoint shifts
closer and closer to it, while the region of interest shrinks like the safe area. These
constrained random walks are forced to clash, and stronger hypotheses eliminate
weaker ones or coalesce until at the very end, only one winner remains.
3. Focusing is Circumambulation
This recent post on focusing ﬁts very cleanly into Babble and Prune. I recommend
reading the whole post, but here are some relevant points:
The "big idea" of Focusing (according to me) is that parts of your subconscious
System 1 are storing up massive amounts of accurate, useful information that
your conscious System 2 isn't really able to access. There are things that you're
aware of "on some level," data that you perceived but didn't consciously process
(see blindsight as both concrete example and metaphor), competing goalsets that
you've never explicitly articulated, and so on and so forth.
[...]
(There I was doing a super-fast scan over a whole bunch of possible words and
phrases and explanations, all the while paying very close attention to my truth-
detection module. I knew where the answer would be, and I knew its general
shape, but I had to keep looking until I found something juuuuust right. It's like
when you mentally stutter past ﬁve or six diﬀerent comebacks to throw at your
sibling until you ﬁnd the one that's cutting, true, and okay-to-say-even-though-
your-parents-are-listening.)
You get the idea. As the process continues, the picture grows more and more
accurate, and evokes more and more of the underlying what's-really-going-on. I
can feel a sort of click, or a release of pressure, or a deep rightness, once I say the
thing that really completes the picture.
In our language, massive amounts of accurate, useful information are stored by
System 1 behind the First Gate of Prune, and focusing is a particular exercise towards

noticing previously subconscious information (beacons, holes, and discontinuities) and
letting useful Babble through. Prune is a necessary part of this process, killing weak
hypotheses and directing Babble in the proper area.
I have described a general, not entirely novel, approach to tending your mental
garden, circling around the map via Babble in search of precision, completeness, and
internal consistency. The upshot of this post is that Circumambulation is the right
geometric imagery for this process, that geometric metaphors highlight the possibility
of serious and nonlocal ﬂaws in the map, and therefore that spiralling around the truth
at length is rarely a waste of time.

Write
This is a linkpost for https://radimentary.wordpress.com/2018/01/28/write/
This post is Part 5 of the sequence on Babble. After writing Hammers and Nails, I
ﬁgured out that my favorite Hammer is writing.
Write about everything. Write it immediately. Edit afterwards.
In this post, I tell two stories about the magic of putting words on paper. Make your
own conclusions about the brain-enhancing eﬀects of writing.
Then, I share my recursive blogging process which avoids the ickiness of planning and
gets directly to the thick of things. The recursion makes it easy to expand sections
without breaking into structureless rambles. My process is mostly inspired by
Nonﬁction Writing Advice.
Finally, I explain why disclaimers suck.
Meaning Injection
In middle school, I carried a single enormous binder to every class, ﬁlled with colored
tabs and lined paper. In that binder, I took notes religiously, trying various techniques
of organization and highlighting.
I had no good notion of why I took notes. After all, I never looked at the notes I took -
textbooks were always easier on the eyes than my chicken scrawl. I did notice,
however, that I remembered things better when I wrote them down, so for a time my
plan was to simply take the notes and forget about them in my binder.
I eventually noticed what was actually working, and discarded the superstition. I left
my binder to gather dust and started bringing lined paper to class to take the notes.
When the bell tolled, I dropped the notes in the recycling before leaving the
classroom. I wrote down only the key words and spent the rest of class staring at
those scattered words, injecting them with the meaning. Imagine lonely crimson ink-
drops falling into a glass of water, bursting into delicious, velvety tendrils at contact.
Plop, Plop. That's how meaning injection feels.
Several iterations later, my study strategy is perfectly streamlined.
I no longer take notes in class. The night before each test, I skim the textbook with a
blank sheet of paper and write down all the important terms - without deﬁnitions; the
sheet of paper serves as a kind of corporeal mind palace. I read through the list once,
injecting the words with meaning. Plop, Plop. And that would be enough.
Research Notes
Fast forward to 2013 and transport yourself to my ﬁrst summer research program.
Every Monday, we give a brief board about that week's progress. I mull ideas on paper
over the week before TeXing them up Sunday night.

A curious thing happened - all my progress happened on Monday and Tuesday. I spent
the rest of the week meandering around the same ideas, checking special cases and
writing up fragments of arguments. On Sunday night I write everything down, and the
ideas crystallize on paper. They lose their grip on me, and I move on to new pastures.
These days, I reproduce the eﬀect simply by writing up any partial results as quickly
as possible. Oftentimes, I sit down with an uncertain inspiration and immediately try
to TeXing it. Usually, it fails catastrophically but I gain a piece of insight. If successful,
the argument pops out on paper fully-formed by narrative force. My last paper - itself
only twenty pages - is a Frankenstein-esque construct built out of thirty rambling TeX
documents.
Structure is Process
Very readable and natural blog posts can be written recursively with minimal pre-
processing. My process is mainly designed to streamline brainstorming and outlining
while avoiding two failure modes.
The ﬁrst failure mode is simply writing too little. Thus, I emphasize rapidity over
content and quantity over quality.
The second failure mode is writing long, detailed pieces with little structure, and
ﬁnding myself disagreeing from the beginning of the argument by the time I reach the
end. You know the loudness bar over the microphone icon in Skype settings? The
length of my blog posts used to ﬂy up and down just like that capricious little bar. I'm
incapable of ﬁnishing two paragraphs without changing my mind, and my process is
designed to recursively deconstruct into semi-independent pieces that I can close and
set aside.
1. Headers are Brainstorming
Brainstorm by breaking your argument down into a handful (2-5) of the core ideas.
Separate individual arguments and anecdotes. Write down titles for each.
For this post, I started with four sections: "Study Skills," "Research Notes," "AI Risk and
Aﬀordance Widths," and "Structure is Process." Later on, section 3 was removed - I
couldn't ﬁnd an angle to tie AI Risk with the magic of poetry. Also, "aﬀordance width"
is a wonderful idea, but the concept handle screeches like cheap chalk. Would
someone please syllable it?
2. Intros are Outlines
The introduction to a post deﬁnes the topic and sketches the arc of each section. It
teases the reader with sneak peaks. Your post is cobbled together from unrelated shit
but the reader won't notice if you tie it together with a metaphor or something.
In the introduction, it can be useful to gather links to background reading and place
the post in a larger context. The reader ﬁnds this thoughtful and welcoming. Actually,
it's a convenient trick to batch-process all the link hunting.
3. Recurse

Recursively apply this process down to the level of sentences. Each section longer
than a single complete thought should be broken into subsections and outlined. Each
paragraph longer than ﬁve sentences should be broken into smaller paragraphs.
At the lowest level, it may be wise to treat topic sentences as micro-headers, to be
written ﬁrst before ﬁlling out the paragraphs with content. It may also be wise to
reﬂect on the integration of the (sub-)sections into the whole before ﬁlling them out.
On Disclaimers
If you think your words are but pale wavering shadows of the real content in your
heart, you are not alone. You will feel the need to precede your posts with all manner
of content warnings, epistemic statuses, and protests of humility - you will feel no
right to cry black and white when all the world is shades of gray.
There are decent and genuine reasons for disclaimers, but I'll let you produce those. I
propose that we use epistemic statuses and disclaimers sparingly.
What happens to the reader when every post starts, "epistemic status: mostly true
with a chance of rain?" As the reader's eyes hit "epistemic status," notice how they
roll to the side and glaze over ever so slightly.
Ugh.
She knows it's 10% about epistemic and 90% about status. Magic brain juice [citation
needed] takes over and associates that instant "ugh" with opening your posts.
Instead of conditioning readers to hate us, I propose we return to a saner time, where
the fact that your words are but a pale wavering shadow of the grand, mysterious
truth in your heart is the default assumption about human communication. Where
truth is a dance of successive approximations yet no step in that dance requires adult
supervision. Where quibbles over certitude are banished to the comments section
where they belong.

