
Best of LessWrong: September 2015
1. The Library of Scott Alexandria
2. Being unable to despair
3. See the dark world
4. Residing in the mortal realm
5. Choose without suﬀering

The Library of Scott Alexandria
I've put together a list of what I think are the best Yvain (Scott Alexander) posts for
new readers, drawing from SlateStarCodex, LessWrong, and Scott's LiveJournal.
The list should make the most sense to people who start from the top and read
through it in order, though skipping around is encouraged too. Rather than making a
chronological list, I've tried to order things by a mix of "where do I think most people
should start reading?" plus "sorting related posts together."
This is a work in progress; you're invited to suggest things you'd add, remove, or
shuﬄe around. Since many of the titles are a bit cryptic, I'm adding short descriptions.
See my blog for a version without the descriptions.
 
I. Rationality and Rationalization
Blue- and Yellow-Tinted Choices  ·····  An introduction to context-sensitive biases.
The Apologist and the Revolutionary  ·····  Do separate brain processes
rationalize and question ideas?
Historical Realism  ·····  When reality is unrealistic.
Simultaneously Right and Wrong  ·····  On self-handicapping and self-deception.
You May Already Be A Sinner  ·····  Self-deception in cases where your decisions
make no diﬀerence.
Beware the Man of One Study  ·····  On minimum wage laws and cherry-picked
evidence.
Debunked and Well-Refuted  ·····  When should we say that a study has been
"debunked"?
How to Not Lose an Argument  ·····  How to be more persuasive in entrenched
arguments.
The Least Convenient Possible World  ·····  Why it's useful to strengthen
arguments you disagree with.
Bayes for Schizophrenics: Reasoning in Delusional Disorders  ·····  Hypotheses
about the role of perception, evidence integration, and priors in delusions.
Generalizing from One Example  ·····  On the typical mind fallacy: assuming other
people are like you.
Typical Mind and Politics  ·····  Do political disagreements stem from neurological
disagreements?
II. Probabilism
Conﬁdence Levels Inside and Outside an Argument  ·····  Should you believe your
own conclusions, when they're extreme?
Schizophrenia and Geomagnetic Storms  ·····  When bizarre ideas turn out to be
true.
Talking Snakes: A Cautionary Tale  ·····  Should we dismiss all absurd claims?
Arguments from My Opponent Believes Something  ·····  Ten fully general
arguments.

Statistical Literacy Among Doctors Now Lower Than Chance  ·····  Common errors
in probabilistic reasoning.
Techniques for Probability Estimates  ·····  Six methods for quantifying
uncertainty.
On First Looking into Chapman's "Pop Bayesianism"  ·····  Reasons Bayesian
epistemology may not be trivial.
Utilitarianism for Engineers  ·····  Are there good-enough heuristics for comparing
people's preferences?
If It's Worth Doing, It's Worth Doing with Made-Up Statistics  ·····  The practical
value of probabilities.
Marijuana: Much More Than You Wanted to Know  ·····  Assessing marijuana's
costs and beneﬁts.
Are You a Solar Deity?  ·····  On conﬁrmation bias in the comparative study of
religions.
The "Spot the Fakes" Test  ·····  An approach to testing humanities hypotheses.
Epistemic Learned Helplessness  ·····  What should we do when bad arguments
sound convincing?
III. Science and Doubt
Google Correlate Does Not Imply Google Causation  ·····  Peculiar correlations
between Google search terms.
Stop Confounding Yourself! Stop Confounding Yourself!  ·····  A correlational study
on the eﬀects of bullying.
Eﬀects of Vertical Acceleration on Wrongness  ·····  On evidence-based medicine.
90% Of All Claims About The Problems With Medical Studies Are Wrong  ·····  Is it
the case that "90% of medical research is false"?
Prisons are Built with Bricks of Law and Brothels with Bricks of Religion, But That
Doesn't Prove a Causal Relationship  ·····  Do psychiatric interventions increase
suicide risk?
Noisy Poll Results and the Reptilian Muslim Climatologists from Mars  ····· 
Skepticism about poll results.
Two Dark Side Statistics Papers  ·····  Statistical tricks for creating eﬀects out of
nothing.
Alcoholics Anonymous: Much More Than You Wanted to Know  ·····  Is AA
eﬀective for treating alcohol abuse?
The Control Group Is Out Of Control  ·····  Parapsychology as the "control group"
for all of psychology.
The Cowpox of Doubt  ·····  Focusing on easy questions inoculates against
uncertainty.
The Skeptic's Trilemma  ·····  Explaining mysteries, vs. worshiping them, vs.
dismissing them.
If You Can't Make Predictions, You're Still in a Crisis  ·····  On psychology studies'
replication failures.
IV. Medicine, Therapy, and Human Enhancement
Scientiﬁc Freud  ·····  How does psychoanalysis compare to cognitive behavioral
therapy?
Sleep - Now by Prescription  ·····  On melatonin.
In Defense of Psych Treatment for Attempted Suicide  ·····   Suicide is usually not
a rational, informed decision.

Who By Very Slow Decay  ·····  On old age and death in the medical system.
Medicine, As Not Seen on TV  ·····  What is it actually like to be a doctor?
Searching for One-Sided Tradeoﬀs  ·····  How can we ﬁnd good ideas that others
haven't found ﬁrst?
Do Life Hacks Ever Reach Fixation?  ·····  Why aren't there more good ideas that
everyone has adopted?
Polyamory is Boring  ·····  Deromanticizing multi-partner romance.
Can You Condition Yourself?  ·····  On shaping new habits by rewarding oneself.
Wirehead Gods on Lotus Thrones  ·····  Is the future boring? Transcendently
blissful? Boringly blissful?
Don't Fear the Filter  ·····  Does the Fermi Paradox mean that our species is
doomed?
Transhumanist Fables  ·····  Six futurist fairy tales.
V. Introduction to Game Theory
Backward Reasoning Over Decision Trees  ·····  Sequential games, and why
adding options can hurt you.
Nash Equilibria and Schelling Points  ·····  Simultaneous games, mixed strategies,
and coordination.
Introduction to Prisoners' Dilemma  ·····  Why Nash equilibria are sometimes bad
for everyone.
Real-World Solutions to Prisoners' Dilemmas  ·····  How society and evolution
ensure mutual cooperation.
Interlude for Behavioral Economics  ·····  Fairness, superrationality, and self-
image in real-world games.
What is Signaling, Really?  ·····  Actions that convey information, sometimes at
great cost.
Bargaining and Auctions  ·····  Idealized models of correct bidding.
Imperfect Voting Systems  ·····  Strengths and weaknesses of diﬀerent voting
systems.
Game Theory as a Dark Art  ·····  Ways to exploit seemingly "economically
rational" behavior.
VI. Promises and Principles
Beware Trivial Inconveniences  ·····  Small obstacles can have a huge eﬀect on
behavior.
Time and Eﬀort Discounting  ·····  On inconsistencies in our revealed preferences.
Applied Picoeconomics  ·····  Binding your future self to your present goals.
Schelling Fences on Slippery Slopes  ·····  Using arbitrary thresholds to improve
coordination.
Democracy is the Worst Form of Government Except for All the Others Except
Possibly Futarchy  ·····  Like democracy, futarchy (rule by prediction markets) has
the advantage of appearing impartial.
Eight Short Studies on Excuses  ·····  When should we allow exceptions to our
rules?
Revenge as Charitable Act  ·····  Revenge can be a personally costly way to
disincentivize misdeeds.
Would Your Real Preferences Please Stand Up?  ·····  Are we hypocrites, or just
weak-willed?
Are Wireheads Happy?  ·····  Distinguishing "wanting" something from "liking" it.

Guilt: Another Gift Nobody Wants  ·····  An evolutionary, signaling-based
explanation of guilt.
VII. Cognition and Association
Diseased Thinking: Dissolving Questions about Disease  ·····  On verbal
disagreements.
The Noncentral Fallacy — The Worst Argument in the World?  ·····  Judging an
entire category by an emotional association that only applies to typical category
members.
The Power of Positivist Thinking  ·····  Focus on statements' empirical content.
When Truth Isn't Enough  ·····  It's possible to agree denotationally while
disagreeing connotationally.
Ambijectivity  ·····  When a question is both subjective and objective.
The Blue-Minimizing Robot  ·····  A parable on agency.
Basics of Animal Reinforcement  ·····  A primer on classical and operant
conditioning.
Wanting vs. Liking Revisited  ·····  Distinguishing motivation to act from
reinforcement.
Physical and Mental Behavior  ·····  Behaviorism meets thinking.
Trivers on Self-Deception  ·····  The conscious mind as a self-serving social
narrative.
Ego-Syntonic Thoughts and Values  ·····  On endorsed vs. non-endorsed mental
behavior.
Approving Reinforces Low-Eﬀort Behaviors  ·····  Using your self-image to
blackmail yourself.
To What Degree Do We Have Goals?  ·····  Are our unconscious drives like an
agent?
The Limits of Introspection  ·····  Are we good at directly perceiving our
cognition?
Secrets of the Eliminati  ·····  Reducing phenomena to simpler parts, vs.
eliminating them.
Tendencies in Reﬂective Equilibrium  ·····  Aspiring to become more consistent.
Hansonian Optimism  ·····  If ego-syntonic goals are about signaling, is goodness
a lie?
VIII. Doing Good
Newtonian Ethics  ·····  Satirizing moral parochialism and sloppy systematizations
of ethics.
Eﬃcient Charity: Do Unto Others...  ·····  How should we act when our decisions
matter most?
The Economics of Art and the Art of Economics  ·····  Should Detroit sell its
publicly owned artwork?
A Modest Proposal  ·····  Using dead babies as a unit of currency.
The Life Issue  ·····  What are the consequences of drone warfare?
What if Drone Warfare Had Come First?  ·····  A thought experiment.
Nefarious Nefazodone and Flashy Rare Side-Eﬀects  ·····  On choosing between
drug side-eﬀects.
The Consequentialism FAQ  ·····  Argues for assessing actions based on how they
help or harm people.

Doing Your Good Deed for the Day  ·····  Doing some good can reduce people's
willingness to do more good.
I Myself Am A Scientismist  ·····  Why apply scientiﬁc methods to non-scientiﬁc
domains?
Whose Utilitarianism?  ·····  Questioning the objectivity and uniqueness of
utilitarianism.
Book Review: After Virtue  ·····  On virtue ethics, a reaction against modern moral
philosophy.
Read History of Philosophy Backwards  ·····  Historical texts reveal our implicit
assumptions.
Virtue Ethics: Not Practically Useful Either  ·····  Is virtue ethics useful
prescriptively or descriptively?
Last Thoughts on Virtue Ethics  ·····  What claims do virtue ethicists make?
Proving Too Much  ·····  If an argument sometimes proves falsehoods, it can't be
valid.
IX. Liberty
The Non-Libertarian FAQ (aka Why I Hate Your Freedom)
A Blessing in Disguise, Albeit a Very Good Disguise
Basic Income Guarantees
Book Review: The Nurture Assumption
The Death of Wages is Sin
Thank You For Doing Something Ambiguously Between Smoking And Not
Smoking
Lies, Damned Lies, and Facebook (Part 1 of ∞)
The Life Cycle of Medical Ideas
Vote on Values, Outsource Beliefs
A Something Sort of Like Left-Libertarian-ist Manifesto
Plutocracy Isn't About Money
Against Tulip Subsidies
SlateStarCodex Gives a Graduation Speech
X. Progress
Intellectual Hipsters and Meta-Contrarianism
A Signaling Theory of Class x Politics Interaction
Reactionary Philosophy in an Enormous, Planet-Sized Nutshell
A Thrive/Survive Theory of the Political Spectrum
We Wrestle Not With Flesh And Blood, But Against Powers And Principalities
Poor Folks Do Smile... For Now
Apart from Better Sanitation and Medicine and Education and Irrigation and
Public Health and Roads and Public Order, What Has Modernity Done for Us?
The Wisdom of the Ancients
Can Atheists Appreciate Chesterton?
Holocaust Good for You, Research Finds, But Frequent Taunting Causes Cancer in
Rats
Public Awareness Campaigns
Social Psychology is a Flamethrower
Nature is Not a Slate. It's a Series of Levers.
The Anti-Reactionary FAQ
The Poor You Will Always Have With You

Proposed Biological Explanations for Historical Trends in Crime
Society is Fixed, Biology is Mutable
XI. Social Justice
Practically-a-Book Review: Dying to be Free
Drug Testing Welfare Users is a Sham, But Not for the Reasons You Think
The Meditation on Creepiness
The Meditation on Superweapons
The Meditation on the War on Applause Lights
The Meditation on Superweapons and Bingo
An Analysis of the Formalist Account of Power Relations in Democratic Societies
Arguments About Male Violence Prove Too Much
Social Justice for the Highly-Demanding-of-Rigor
Against Bravery Debates
All Debates Are Bravery Debates
A Comment I Posted on "What Would JT Do?"
We Are All MsScribe
The Spirit of the First Amendment
A Response to Apophemi on Triggers
Lies, Damned Lies, and Social Media: False Rape Accusations
In Favor of Niceness, Community, and Civilization
XII. Politicization
Right is the New Left
Weak Men are Superweapons
You Kant Dismiss Universalizability
I Can Tolerate Anything Except the Outgroup
Five Case Studies on Politicization
Black People Less Likely
Nydwracu's Fnords
All in All, Another Brick in the Motte
Ethnic Tension and Meaningless Arguments
Race and Justice: Much More Than You Wanted to Know
Framing for Light Instead of Heat
The Wonderful Thing About Triggers
Fearful Symmetry
Archipelago and Atomic Communitarianism
XIII. Competition and Cooperation
The Demiurge's Older Brother
Book Review: The Two-Income Trap
Just for Stealing a Mouthful of Bread
Meditations on Moloch
Misperceptions on Moloch
The Invisible Nation — Reconciling Utilitarianism and Contractualism
Freedom on the Centralized Web
Book Review: Singer on Marx
Does Class Warfare Have a Free Rider Problem?

Book Review: Red Plenty
 
If you liked these posts and want more, I suggest browsing the SlateStarCodex
archives.

Being unable to despair
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/being-unable-to-despair/
Sometimes, when people see that their life is about to get a lot harder, they start
buckling down. Other times, they start despairing, or complaining, or preparing
excuses so that they can have one ready when the inevitable failure hits, or giving up
entirely and then failing with abandon. These next few posts assume that you have
the former demeanor, and they might not be helpful to people who are inclined to
respond to new diﬃculties with despair. Remember the law of equal and opposite
advice! (For every person who needs a certain piece of advice, there is someone else
who needs the opposite advice.)
With that said, I'm going to spend a few words giving some tips about how to have the
former demeanor, if you want to. The ﬁrst piece of pertinent advice is that the way
you respond to challenges is context dependent; even if you've already been known to
respond to some problems by despairing, there are likely other problems that you
respond to by buckling down.
There is a speciﬁc mindset that, in my experience, makes it much easier to adopt the
"buckle down" demeanor. This is the mindset where "not doing anything" doesn't
seem like an available option in the action-space. I've written a bit before about how I
think many people think there is a default "rest state", and this is a related concept:
many people seem to think that there is a privileged "don't do anything" action, that
consists of something like curling up into a ball, staying in bed, and refusing to answer
emails. It's much easier to adopt the "buckle down" demeanor when, instead, curling
up in a ball and staying in bed feels like just another action. It's just another way to
respond to the situation, which has some merits and some ﬂaws.
So this is my second piece of advice, if you want to be the sort of person who buckles
down in the face of hardship: see the world in terms of possible responses. See curling
up in bed and ignoring the world as just one possible response, rather than an escape
hatch. Dispel the illusion that some actions are labeled "do nothing," and notice that
those, too, are responses. There is no privileged null choice.
(That's not to say that it's bad to curl up in a ball on your bed and ignore the world for
a while. Sometimes this is exactly what you need to recover. Sometimes it's what the
monkey is going to do regardless of what you decide. The point is that when nature
oﬀers you a choice, there is no "don't choose" option. There are only the options that
nature oﬀers, and all you can do is pick the best of them.)
My third piece of advice is to remember that you reside in the mortal realm. If you get
new information or a new way of looking at the world and you start to feel despair, or
hopelessness, or helpless, or impotent, then it is perfectly OK to respond by curling up
in a corner and feeling sad and scared and small for a little while. That's a ﬁne
response. It doesn't mean that you're not up to the task. Nor does it mean that you
are condemned to despairing forever. You're allowed to feel small sometimes, and
then get back up and keep going, without any need to pretend that things are ﬁne.
We're monkeys. Feeling helpless happens.
Rising to the challenge doesn't mean never feeling helpless. It means pushing on
anyway, even if you feel helpless sometimes.

In my experience, tapping into internal drive often requires tapping into a deep desire
to make the world be diﬀerent, in a world that's very large and very hurting and very
hard to change. When trying to do this, it can be easy to get overwhelmed by the
odds stacked against you — regardless of their scale. (In fact, I have often found that
the cards stacked against me personally — when I feel isolated, lonely, or friendless —
induce as much despair as the cards stacked against anyone who tries to change the
world at large.)
In the next few posts, I'm going to talk about tapping into that internal drive, and this
will entail trying to see the situation for what it really is: which means owning up to
everything stacked against you. If you aren't careful, this might cause you to buckle.
But if you do it right, it can cause you to buckle down instead, and provide a source of
drive.

See the dark world
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/see-the-dark-world/
Consider ﬁctional Carol, who has convinced herself that she doesn't need to worry
about the suﬀering of people who live far away. She works to improve her local
community, and donates to her local church. She's a kind and loving woman, and she
does her part, and (she reasons) that's all anyone can be expected to do.
Now consider ﬁctional Dave, who failed a job interview. When telling his friends the
story, he emphasizes how the interviewers were biased against him, and how they
asked stupid questions.
Meanwhile, driven by hunger, a fox tries to reach some grapes hanging high on the
vine but is unable to, although he leaps with all his strength. As he goes away, he
remarks "Oh, you aren't even ripe yet! I don't need any sour grapes."
All of these reactions — and many others — share a common kernel. Carol, Dave, and
the fox are all inventing reasons why an unpleasant state of aﬀairs is acceptable.
They're not inventing reasons why the world is good, by any means; but they are
putting forth cognitive eﬀort to make it seem tolerable.
Carol would surely tell you that it's terrible that children are suﬀering abroad — but
only after convincing herself that her duty to help them had been discharged.
The fox would tell you that the world is worse for being full of sour grapes — and yet,
he still had to work hard to assure himself that he didn't live in a far worse world,
where the grapes were both ripe and inaccessible.
There's a certain type of darkness in the world that most people simply cannot to see.
It's not the abstract darkness: people will readily acknowledge that the world is
broken, and explain how and why the hated out-group is responsible. And that's
exactly what I'm pointing at: upon seeing that the world is broken, people experience
an impulse to explain the brokenness in a way that relieves the tension. When seeing
that the world is broken, people reﬂexively feel a need to explain. Carol can
acknowledge that there is suﬀering abroad, but this acknowledgement comes part
and parcel with an explanation about why she bears no responsibility. Dave can
acknowledge that he failed to pass the interview, but his mind automatically
generates reasons why this is an acceptable state of aﬀairs.
This is the type of darkness in the world that most people cannot see: they cannot see
a world that is unacceptable. Upon noticing that the world is broken, they reﬂexively
list reasons why it is still tolerable. Even cynicism, I think, can ﬁll this role: I often read
cynicism as an attempt to explain a world full of callous neglect and casual cruelty, in
a framework that makes neglect and cruelty seem natural and expected (and
therefore tolerable).
I call this reﬂexive response "toleriﬁcation," and if you watch for it, you can see it
everywhere.
The sour grapes fallacy is a clear example of toleriﬁcation, but it's only one instance of
the broader class. Toleriﬁcation occurs any time you see something bad in the world

and feel an impulse to explain, especially if that explanation relieves pressure that
would otherwise be placed on you.
Consider, for example, Alice and Bob in my allegory of the dragon. Both have recently
learned that the market value of a life is only a few thousand dollars. Both are
uncomfortable with this, and they reﬂexively tolerify the information in diﬀerent ways.
Bob denies the information, protesting that one can't make decisions by attaching
dollar values to lives, because lives are sacred. This declaration of a sacred value
allows Bob to deny the discrepancy entirely, reject the implied responsibility, and
restore tolerability to the universe.
Alice, by contrast, accepts the data and denies the intuition that lives are sacred. She
notes that if you act like lives are worth more than a few thousand dollars then you'll
save fewer lives than you could, and thus anyone who acts otherwise and wants to
save lives is inconsistent. Therefore, she concludes that she can't treat the intrinsic
value of a life as worth any more than the market price, and grows cynical — not only
are lives non-sacred, she realizes, but they're not worth that much more than a few
thousand cans of coke. Now she can worry less about saving lives: they weren't worth
as much as she thought, anyway. Toleriﬁcation successful.
Notice how their gazes slip to one side or the other, both of them failing to see the
dark world — the one where lives are both nigh invaluable, and priced at $3000. The
one where it's reprehensible to pretend that a life is worth only as much as a few
thousand cans of coke, and this is how you have to price a life if you want to save as
many lives as you can. The world with a grim gap between life's price and life's value.
This is the world that both Alice and Bob both reﬂexively tolerify away from.
In me, toleriﬁcation is toxic to intrinsic motivation. If you want intrinsic drive, I suggest
you train yourself to notice when your gaze slips to one side or the other. When that
happens, focus, and stare directly at the dark world.
Content note: the remainder of this post encourages you to contemplate and
acknowledge signiﬁcant diﬃculties in your own life. I assume that the reader is
resilient in the face of adversity . If acknowledging adversity in your life is currently
liable to harm you, consider skipping the rest of this post.
My favored tool for subverting the impulse to tolerify the intolerable (and thereby
stare directly at the dark world) is to pose myself a "what if" question.
What if I lived in the world where it was both the case that lives are nigh invaluable,
and it costs only a few thousand dollars to save a life?
What if I lived in the world where it was both the case that I failed the interview and it
was because I lacked the requisite skill?
The default impulse, upon learning that I failed the interview, might be to tolerify.
Someone prone to toleriﬁcation might automatically, reﬂexively, start listing ways that
the interview was stacked against them, or reasons why the questions were stupid, or
reasons why they didn't want the job anyway. Then they might jump directly into the
next interview, with excuses already in hand for when they fail that one too. This
illustrates one major way that toleriﬁcation can be harmful: it might prevent you from
seeing what really needs to be done. The person who refuses to tolerify can seriously
consider spending more time practicing, or switching careers. If necessary, they can

acknowledge that they really need to get a job while still dramatically unqualiﬁed, and
decide to play the numbers with full knowledge of what they're doing. If they tolerify,
they have to act indignant when they fail. If they don't, they can face what needs to
be done.
Refusing to tolerify in this situation can be really really hard. Saying "It seems I am not
yet be skilled enough to get a job in this ﬁeld" can be tough, especially when your
livelihood depends upon the opposite being true (and double-especially if you think
that past failures make you a "bad person").
The nice thing about the "what if" question is that I don't need to believe that that's
the actual world when pondering the "what if". I don't need to acknowledge that I am
unqualiﬁed for the job, I can simply ask what would do if I were. This makes it easier
to plan out what I would do if I could see the dark world, and having a plan often
makes it easier to acknowledge that the world I'm living in is dark. (See also: leaving
yourself a line of retreat.)
So, let's run through some what ifs.
What if we lived in the world where it was both the case that (a) unwanted
pregnancies could ruin the lives of both mother and child and (c) unborn children were
moral patients with a right to life? What would you do then?
What if we lived in the world where it was both the case that (a) people are living and
dying in extreme poverty and (b) you really need a new car soon if you want to keep
your job, but you could spare a few thousand dollars if you really had to. What would
you do then?
What if we lived in the world where people do have souls, but they're implemented on
brains made of meat that rots when you die?
What if we lived in the world where evolution built conscious predators, and conscious
prey that suﬀers as it gets eaten alive?
What if almost nobody was evil, but almost everything was broken anyway? What if
the hated out-groups aren't responsible for all the suﬀering?
I'm not claiming that these what-ifs are accurate. Rather, I oﬀer this as a tool for
staring the dark world directly in the face. Imagine the world that is as bad as it might
be. Imagine the world were full of intolerable injustices. What would you do then?
Can you look upon those dark worlds and feel a sense of despair, of the world being
harder to ﬁx than seems acceptable? Do you get a feeling of bracing yourself for
making terrible tradeoﬀs, because there are too many problems and you can't handle
all of them? If so, that's good: that's what it feels like, to see the dark world.
The question is, what would you do then?
I'm not here to oﬀer answers. Maybe your answer is "well in that world I'd stop trying
so hard and move to a cabin in the woods and try to forget how screwed up
everything was." Or maybe your answer is "in that case I'd rise to the challenge, no
matter how terrible the odds." More likely, it's something else entirely. I'm not trying to
feed you answers. I'm trying to help you refuse to tolerify, because there is a source of
resolve that comes only when you see the dark world.

I have to believe this falsehood, because otherwise I would be unable to go on.
This is something that I hear fairly frequently, either to my face, or in popular media.
"I have to believe in God; otherwise there would be no meaning in my life." Or "It's a
good thing humans are unrealistically optimistic; we wouldn't be able to handle
reality." Or "I have to believe that I'm going to get this job; otherwise I wouldn't be
able to continue trying." Or,
"All right," said Susan. "I'm not stupid. You're saying humans need... fantasies to
make life bearable."
really? as if it was some kind of pink pill? no. humans need fantasy to be human.
to be the place where the falling angel meets the rising ape.
"Tooth fairies? Hogfathers? Little—"
yes. as practice. you have to start out learning to believe the little lies.
"So we can believe the big ones?"
yes. justice. mercy. duty. that sort of thing.
"They're not the same at all!"
you think so? then take the universe and grind it down to the ﬁnest powder and
sieve it through the ﬁnest sieve and then show me one atom of justice, one
molecule of mercy. and yet—Death waved a hand. and yet you act as if there is
some ideal order in the world, as if there is some...some rightness in the universe
by which it may be judged.
"Yes, but people have got to believe that, or what's the point—"
my point exactly.
— Terry Pratchett, Hogfather
 
People say they need to tolerify, because otherwise they wouldn't be able to handle
the intolerable world.
But that's false. Acknowledging that the world is unacceptable will not kill you; the
world is already as unacceptable as it is. Remember the litany of Gendlin.
So face the dark world. See the intolerable.
Take up the burden that is supposed to be unbearable. Don't excuse the world, don't
come up with reasons why it's OK. Let it be not OK.
What happens then? What do you feel then?
Is there a sense of despair or helpessness? Is there a sense of hot fury or cold resolve?
Is there a sense of being tiny in the face of a problem that is large?
Live there, in the face of the intolerable. Don't struggle to make it acceptable, just live
with the bad world, while buckling down rather than buckling.

It is there, while staring the dark world in the face, that I ﬁnd a deep well of intrinsic
drive. It is there that my resolve and determination come to me, rather than me
having to go hunting for them.
I ﬁnd it amusing that "we need lies because we can't bear the truth" is such a
common refrain, given how much of my drive stems from my response to attempting
to bear the truth.
I ﬁnd that it's common for people to tell themselves that they need the lies in order to
bear reality. In fact, I bet that many of you can think of one thing oﬀ the top of your
heads that you're intentionally tolerifying, because the truth is too scary to even
consider. (I've seen at least a dozen failed relationships dragged out for months and
months due to this eﬀect.)
I say, if you want the intrinsic drive, drop the illusion. Refuse to tolerify. Face the facts
that you feared you would not be able to handle. You are likely correct that they will
be hard to bear, and you are likely correct that attempting to bear them will change
you. But that change doesn't need to break you. It can also make you stronger, and
fuel your resolve.
So see the dark world. See everything intolerable. Let the urge to tolerify it build, but
don't relent. Just live there in the intolerable world, refusing to tolerate it. See whether
you feel that growing, burning desire to make the world be diﬀerent. Let parts of
yourself harden. Let your resolve grow. It is here, in the face of the intolerable, that
you will be able to tap into intrinsic motivation.

Residing in the mortal realm
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/residing-in-the-mortal-realm/
The last sevenish posts describe the main tools I have for removing guilt-based
motivation. The common thread running through them can be summed up as follows:
Reside in the mortal realm.
Many people hold themselves to a very diﬀerent standard than they hold others. They
hold themselves accountable for failing to do the psychologically impossible. They fret
over past mistakes and treat themselves as failed gods, rather than ambitious
monkeys. This condemning-of-the-self can lead to great guilt, with all its negative
eﬀects.
My suggestion for dealing with guilt, roughly speaking, is to ﬁrst focus your guilt, by
dispelling the guilt that comes from not doing what other people think you should or
from from false obligations, and shifting all your guilt into guilt about the fact that you
have not yet made the future how you want it to be. Then, once your guilt is focused
there, remember that you are a denizen of the mortal realm.
In the past, you have failed to act as you wished to act. You have failed to make the
best available choices. But these facts have little bearing on what you do next. They
have some bearing, insofar as your memories still hold lessons that can teach you
about how to better steer yourself to steer the world, but they do not say anything
about the color of your soul. They are simply the background knowledge against which
you move forwards, from here, looking only towards the future.
You are a mortal, who often struggles to follow their own will, and your actions set the
course of the entire future. Instead of berating yourself for your shortcomings, ﬁgure
out how to do the best you can given the shortcomings — sometimes by spending
time and eﬀort to ﬁx them (mere willpower seldom suﬃces), and sometimes by taking
them as given and working around them.
Be a mere mortal, and do the best you can anyway. Learn everything your can from
your mistakes, and then forgive yourself your sins, and look only to how much better
you can make the future (knowing what you know now about how you perform in
diﬀerent situations).
Guilt has no place among mortals: we already know we're fallible. We don't need to
suﬀer over that fact: our failings provide only information about what to do next, if we
want to steer the future.
Over the last few months, three diﬀerent people have informed me that I broke their
motivation systems. In short, one found themselves less able to care about what they
were working on, another found themselves unable to force themselves to work,
another found themselves unable to continue spurring themselves on with guilt.
In part, this is working as intended: in the long run, I think that guilt-based motivation
can be harmful. However, my goal is not to simply remove existing motivation
systems: my goal is to replace guilt with something else.

So the question is, without guilt, what can you use for drive? And this brings us to the
penultimate arc of my "replacing guilt" series of posts.
I've already given partial answers to the question "whence internal drive?", when
talking on caring, or about the value of a life, or about caring about something larger
than yourself. Those posts are intended to inspire you and remind you that there's
something worth ﬁghting for, and that you can ﬁght for it even if you lack a burning
passion. That's not the whole picture, though, and in the upcoming arc, I'll touch upon
a diﬀerent aspect of intrinsic motivation.
I think many people are motivated by an intrinsic (often subconscious) desire to be
virtuous, or perhaps by a strong aversion to "being bad." I think many other people
are motivated primarily by whatever obligations currently sit on their plate. They don't
need to ask themselves what they are doing or why; they simply continue fulﬁlling the
obligations in front of them so that life continues proceed. They fulﬁll obligations at
school, they fulﬁll obligations at their jobs, they ﬁnd a spouse, they start a family, they
fulﬁll obligations to their family. The obligations keep ﬂowing in a steady stream, and
there is never any need to soul-search in a grand quest for some sort of deep intrinsic
drive (except, perhaps, during the occasional "midlife crisis," which is a ﬁne
distraction that they're expected to eventually overcome).
Yet here I stand, suggesting that you ditch the notion "being bad" and drop your
obligations entirely, keeping only what remains. But dropping an existing framework is
a far cry from creating a new one, and dropping guilt does not often reveal a
blindingly virtuous non-obligation that you're supposed to pursue instead of what you
were currently pursuing.
In fact, the new framework can't contain "supposed tos" at all. Obligations have been
jettisoned.
So in the upcoming arc, I'm not going to give you something to pursue. Rather, I'm
going to do my best to give you a diﬀerent way of looking at the world. I'm going to
describe a vantage point from which guilt motivation seems quaint, and something
else — maybe cold resolve, maybe hot desire, maybe a diﬀerent drive — guides your
actions instead.
From that vantage point, guilt is alien — and it is only once it seems foreign (rather
than evil) that it be fully replaced.

Choose without suﬀering
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/choose-without-suﬀering/
Imagine Eve, who works a service industry job. Her manager tells her, at the last
minute and without warning, that she has to staﬀ an event tomorrow in a town a few
hour's drive from where she lives, and she has to wake up at 5am to get there on
time.
Let's further suppose that she's on shaky footing with her manager as it is, and so she
is posed with the following choice: she can either wake up at 5am tomorrow and go to
work, or she can lose her job.
Imagine Eve's demeanor, upon learning this fact. It's likely dour, to say the least.
She's probably grumpy and annoyed and malcontent, and she's likely to vent and
complain all evening. She'll likely spend a lot of cognitive eﬀort tolerifying the
situation, convincing herself either that it's not going to be that bad to wake up early,
or that her manager is a terrible person.
This is a common occurrence, I think: if you give humans the choice between bad and
worse, they get grumpy.
When people ﬁnd that none of their options cross a certain "acceptability" threshold,
they get frustrated.
This, I think, is part of why toleriﬁcation is such a common human response to
unfortunate situations. In an intolerable world, none of your options seem acceptable:
so you tolerify, until at least one option (perhaps indignance, perhaps cynicism,
perhaps doing nothing diﬀerently) passes the acceptablility threshold. Only then are
you able to act.
This behavior won't do, for someone living in a dark world. If you're going to live in a
dark world, then it's very important to learn how to choose the best action available to
you without any concern for how good it is in an absolute sense.
When given a choice between bad and worse, you need to be able to choose "bad",
without qualm.
I think that one of the big reasons why people get annoyed when none of their options
pass the "acceptable" threshold is they're often failing to see a hidden third
alternative, and some part of them knows that this might be the case. In this setting,
the frustration might even be useful, if it puts them in a mental state where they
search more fervently for an escape hatch.
Furthermore, by acting ﬂustered, people may well be able to draw other humans to
their aid, and the additional assistance can often help make the situation better.
So frustration in the face of a choice between bad and worse may be a useful
response in many situations. (At the least, it was useful enough to our ancestors.)
Indeed, when you're oﬀered the choice between bad and worse, the ﬁrst thing to do is
look for a third option and the second thing to do is ask for help. Find shortcuts. Try to
cheat. Call in the cavalry, if you can.

But once you determine that you really have been oﬀered a choice between bad and
worse, and that there are no other options —
Then it is useful to be able to choose "bad," without suﬀering over it.
The ﬁrst step to being able to choose the best option available without suﬀering, is to
simply understand the distinction. Next time you ﬁnd yourself feeling ﬂustered
because none of your options pass an absolute acceptability threshold, pause and
reframe, and look at the relative acceptability of your actions instead. Simply knowing
the distinction and watching out for it in real life may well be enough.
For me, another useful tool for choosing without suﬀering is to ask a "what if" question
about a hypothetical universe, before making a choice in the real world. Let's say I'm
trying to eliminate extreme poverty, and none of my actions seem good. I might say
to myself, "imagine you lived in a world where all your choices led to bad outcomes;
what would you do then?" I can improve the lives of these three people, and then a
million people will die of preventable disease anyway. Or I can try to alter the ﬂow of
politics, and then a million people will die of preventable disease anyway. Or I can put
money into researching preventable diseases, and then a million people will die of
preventable diseases anyway. No matter what I do, at least a million people will die of
preventable diseases. What would I do in that world?
Clearly, the answer is "whatever action saves the most lives." I sometimes ﬁnd it
easier to frame my real problems as if they were hypothetical, identify the answer
there, and then apply that to the real world.
In the hypothetical worlds where there are no third alternatives and all the actions
before you, it doesn't matter that all the actions lead to bad outcomes. The best
choice is still quite clear: take the action that leads to the best outcome, and take it
without remorse. In the hypothetical, conﬁdent that there are no alternatives, it's
quite easy to imagine selecting the least bad option from a terrible lot. In fact, it's
easy to imagine doing this without any impulse to complain or struggle, but instead
only a grim resolve to do the best you can in a bad situation.
So in the real world, do the same. Notice when you're measuring your options against
what you think should happen; notice when you're measuring the futures you can
attain against the futures you want to attain; and treat that as a cue to reframe. Look
at your actions available options again, and stop measuring them against an objective
ideal, and start measuring them against each other. Look for cheats, look for third
alternatives, look for ways out...
...and then, when you're done and you've considered all available options,
simply take the best action available.
Take it, without suﬀering, no matter how bad it is.
That is all there is to do.

