
Best of LessWrong: March 2014
1. Strategic choice of identity
2. Optimal Exercise
3. Political Skills which Increase Income
4. A vote against spaced repetition
5. Self-Congratulatory Rationalism
6. Less Wrong Study Hall - Year 1 Retrospective
7. Don't teach people how to reach the top of a hill
8. On not getting a job as an option

Strategic choice of identity
Identity is mostly discussed on LW in a cautionary manner: keep your identity small,
be aware of the identities you are attached to. As benlandautaylor points out,
identities are very powerful, and while being rightfully cautious about them, we can
also cultivate them deliberately to help us achieve our goals.
Some helpful identities that I have that seem generally applicable:
growth mindset
low-hanging fruit picker
truth-seeker
jack-of-all trades (someone who is good at a variety of skills)
someone who tries new things
universal curiosity
mirror (someone who learns other people's skills)
Out of the above, the most useful is probably growth mindset, since it's eﬀectively a
meta-identity that allows the other parts of my identity to be ﬂuid. The low-hanging
fruit identity helps me be on the lookout for easy optimizations. The universal curiosity
identity motivates me to try to understand various systems and ﬁelds of knowledge,
besides the domains I'm already familiar with. It helps to give these playful or creative
names, for example, "champion of low-hanging fruit". Some of these work well
together, for example the "trying new things" identity contributes to the "jack of all
trades" identity.
It's also important to identify unhelpful identities that get in your way. Negative
identities can be vague like "lazy person" or speciﬁc like "someone who can't ﬁnish a
project". With identities, just like with habits, the easiest way to reduce or eliminate a
bad one seems to be to install a new one that is incompatible with it. For example, if
you have a "shy person" identity, then going to parties or starting conversations with
strangers can generate counterexamples for that identity, and help to displace it with
a new one of "sociable person". Costly signaling can be used to achieve this - for
example, joining a public speaking club. The old identity will not necessarily go away
entirely, but the competing identity will create cognitive dissonance, which it can be
useful to deliberately focus on. More speciﬁc identities require more speciﬁc
counterexamples. Since the original negative identity makes it diﬃcult to perform the
actions that generate counterexamples, there needs to be some form of success spiral
that starts with small steps.
Some examples of unhelpful identities I've had in the past were "person who doesn't
waste things" and "person with poor intuition". The aversion to wasting money and
material things predictably led to wasting time and attention instead. I found it useful
to try "thinking like a trader" to counteract this "stingy person" identity, and get
comfortable with the idea of trading money for time. Now I no longer obsess about
recycling or buy the cheapest version of everything. Underconﬁdence in my intuition
was likely responsible for my tendency to miss the forest for the trees when studying
math or statistics, where I focused on details and missed the big picture ideas that are
essential to actual understanding. My main objection to intuitions was that they feel
imprecise, and I am trying to develop an identity of an "intuition wizard" who can
manipulate concepts from a distance without zooming in. That is a cooler name than
"someone who thinks about things without really understanding them", and brings to

mind some people I know who have amazing intuition for math, which should help the
identity stick.
There can also be ambiguously useful identities, for example I have a "tough person"
identity, which motivates me to challenge myself and expand my comfort zone, but
also increases self-criticism and self-neglect. Given the mixed eﬀects, I'm not yet sure
what to do about this one - maybe I can come up with an identity that only has the
positive eﬀects.
Which identities hold you back, and which ones propel you forward? If you managed to
diminish negative identities, how did you do it and how far did you get?

Optimal Exercise
Followup to: Lifestyle interventions to increase longevity.
What does it mean for exercise to be optimal?
Optimal for looks
Optimal for time
Optimal for eﬀort
Optimal for performance
Optimal for longevity
There may be even more criteria.
We're all likely going for a mix of outcomes, and optimal exercise is going to change
depending on your weighting of diﬀerent factors. So I'm going to discuss something
close to a minimum viable routine based on meta-analyses of exercise studies.
Not knowing which sort of exercise yields the best results gives our brains an excuse
to stop thinking about it. The intent of this post is to go over the dose responses to
various types of exercise. We're going to break through vague notions like "exercise is
good" and "I should probably exercise more" with a concrete plan where you
understand the relevant parameters that will cause dramatic improvements.
How much exercise?
Optimality aside, I recommend starting with a very minimal routine for 6-ish weeks to
build the habit of exercise in to your life. You'll want a program that causes you little
mental stress that you can actually stick with. You've got a few options for achieving
this. The gains from weightlifting can be surprisingly quick—you'll see dramatic
changes in your appearance in 4 months—and seeing yourself lift more weight every
session can be a great motivator. Couch to 5k is a basic running progression designed
for sedentary people. A daily bodyweight routine is a good way to achieve habit
formation through consistency. I recommend making a ﬁrm choice and sticking with it
until it becomes easy.
Once you've made exercise a habit, you'll want to gradually nudge yourself towards
the level that's optimal. So what is that level? Most of the rest of the claims in this
post are supported by this review by Swiss researchers. As far as I know, this is the
largest systematic review of exercise studies ever undertaken, reviewing 7000 studies
with 80 meeting inclusion criteria covering over 1.3 million subjects. Sheer size,
however, is not the only reason to take this study very seriously. As someone who has
read hundreds of exercise studies, I can say that the methodology of the meta-
analysis done to determine dose-response to exercise is excellent. What is most
encouraging is that the study authors repeatedly point out shortcomings, and ways
their ﬁndings should not be interpreted because the underlying data does not warrant
it. They also check for publication bias. One potential caveat is that this a review of
cohort studies, not RCTs. But the authors note that RCTs of exercise almost always
show greater eﬀect sizes, not smaller. This is likely because people over-report how
much exercise they do in observational studies.

In order to compare the intensity of diﬀerent activities, exercise researchers use a unit
called a MET, or metabolic equivalent. The MET is deﬁned so that your weight (in kg) *
METs = Calories you're burning per hour. An example MET table can be found here. For
the purposes of exercise studies, activities are typically classiﬁed as low-intensity,
moderate-intensity, and vigorous-intensity. These roughly correspond to 1-3, 4-6, and
7+ METs per hour. For typical individuals, this will translate to approximately 200, 400,
and 600+ Calories burned per hour.
On the low end, some studies have found dramatic beneﬁts from just the ﬁrst 15
minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per week. These studies indicate that you gain
about as much going from no exercise to some exercise as you do going from some
exercise to optimal exercise.
The Swiss review ﬁnds that the ﬁrst hour per week of vigorous-intensity activity gets
you 2/3rds the beneﬁt of 10 hours per week, but the study authors make sure to point
out that this is an implausible eﬀect size and that there are almost certainly some
confounding and reverse causality issues going on. Which is to say that people who
have better health are simply going to be capable of more exercise.
How about on the high end? Studies diﬀer on where the point of diminishing returns is.
Some put it at 1000-1500 Calories; others as high as 3500 Calories. (Remember, a
typical individual burns ~400 Calories per hour of moderate-intensity exercise.) I'll
shoot for 1500 Calories in my recommendations; 3500 Calories is pretty hard to reach
without exercising like a pro athlete.
Estimates indicate that each minute of exercise gets you 3-7 minutes of extra life on
average, with higher returns for more intense exercise. So every week, you have the
opportunity to get a 3-7x ROI on time spent exercising up to the point of diminishing
returns. I recommend high-intensity exercise—not only does it save time, it's also
been shown to improve health more on a per-Calorie basis.
 
Which exercises?
Weight training programs
You may have shied away from weight training in the past because you thought you
would turn into some huge gross bodybuilder. But bodybuilders and ﬁtness models
take drugs and spend years training intensively to look the way they do. You are not
going to gain 20lbs of muscle overnight magically. This goes double if you're a woman.
You do not have testosterone; you are not going to be building huge muscles no
matter what you do.
Of the forms of exercise I cover, weight training has the most rigorous evidence
separating what works and what doesn't. This study (pdf warning) examines what sort
of resistance training results in the most rapid improvements.
In weight training lingo, AxB means A sets of B repetitions. So 4x10 would mean 40
reps with rest periods every 10 reps. Our study recommends starting with 4x10 3
times a week, and transitioning to 4x4 2 times a week as you become stronger. Aim
for a weight you can barely complete all the reps with.
For an eﬃcient full-body workout, select one exercise from each movement pattern:

Upper push: bench press, incline press, overhead press, dips.
Upper pull: cable rows, barbell rows, dumbbell rows, chin-ups, face pulls.
Lower push: squats, lunges, leg press.
Lower pull: deadlifts, power cleans, hyperextensions, romanian deadlifts, reverse
hyperextensions, glute-ham raises.
So a good starting routine would be
A: 4x10 each of squat, bench press, lat pulldown, hyperextension
B: 4x10 each of squat, overhead press, cable row, hyperextension
alternating A and B workouts on diﬀerent days of the week e.g. AxBxAxx, BxAxBxx.
You'll try to increase the weight by 5lbs each session. As you improve, you want to
decrease the reps and increase the intensity so you can keep advancing. For example,
if you stall a couple times doing 4x10 at 125lbs on your squat, switch to 4x8 and keep
increasing the weight, then 4x6, etc. until you get to something close to an optimal
trained routine:
A: 4x4 each of squats, bench, weighted chins, deadlifts
B: 4x4 each of squats, overhead press, barbell row, power cleans
At this point, you're going to the gym only twice per week to give yourself more
recovery time.
For learning exercises, there are many tutorials available online and I recommend
checking some out if you are confused about form. You can always search for "<name
of exercise> tutorial" and get articles and Youtube videos. Many people feel silly
practicing their form with extremely light weights (often just the empty bar). But many
world record holders start EVERY session this way to warm up and cement muscle
memory. Others are silly NOT to do this. Also keep an eye on your ego. It's easy when
setting goals for yourself to try to lift a weight that you can't really lift with proper
form, because you want to set that personal best. But you'll feel pretty stupid when
you are forced to miss the gym for a month because you hurt yourself.
On exercise selection: I'm not a big fan of deadlifts for absolute newbies, unlike say
Mark Rippetoe in Starting Strength. Maybe add deadlifts in after you've gained some
muscle and you have better awareness of form. I also diﬀer from Rippetoe in
recommending that newbies high bar squat (the distinction being that low bar squats
place the bar across the shoulders and high bar squats place the bar on the
trapezius). I have taught newbies both forms and most ﬁnd high bar squatting easier
to ﬁgure out how to do properly. I spent months learning to low bar squat and still
injured myself; high bar squatting can be taught in a couple sessions in my
experience. Pay attention to whether a tutorial video is trying to teach you low bar
squatting; the cues for each exercise are diﬀerent.
Free weights are generally better than machine exercises, but I recommend cable
rows and lat pulldowns to newbies. The goal is to move from cable rows to barbell
rows, and from lat pulldowns to actual chin-ups. The issue here is that a beginner
won't be able to do the requisite sets and reps of chin-ups and rows with good form.

A note about equipment: Weightlifting shoes have an incredibly high return on
investment. They make back injuries less likely, and drastically improve subjective
experience of squatting. You can get Rogue weightlifting shoes (use your size in men's
dress shoes to size them regardless of gender) for around $120; there are cheaper
options available but good shoes will last years so the amortized cost is low. Here's a
full list of options; note that even the cheapest weightlifting shoes are miles better
than lifting in tennis shoes. I don't have any personal experience with the Reebok
CrossFit lifter, but they seem like a good option under $100 for a shoe with the desired
.75-inch rigid heel. I recommend a cheap belt (expensive ones aren't any better) in
order to improve your execution of the valsalva maneuver during squats and deadlifts
which further protects the spine from ﬂexion under load.
 
Bodyweight routines
For a beginner, something like this is reasonable. Of course such a program will max
out in ﬁtness gains fairly quickly, even if you start doing several cycles of it. But this
isn't our worry as a beginner. For someone serious about progressing with body
weight exercises past this stage, I recommend a program like Overcoming Gravity or
Building the Gymnastic Body. There is not really formal support for the eﬃcacy of
these programs, but they are endorsed by coaches who train many people
successfully, and are consistent with the general principles of weight lifting
(progressive overload, training frequency, etc.).
 
Cardio routines
For cardio, I recommend against high-intensity intervals when starting out. High-
intensity intervals carry a greater risk of injury, especially if you're not used to them.
They're also unpleasant and not conducive to building habits. For starting out, I
recommend something that is based more on psychological results rather than
performance optimality, like Couch to 5k. As you progress, start adding in short bursts
of more intense eﬀort. The idea is to tire yourself out quickly. If your cardio routine
lasts more than 30 minutes you're probably going too easy.
What type of cardio should you do? Cardio that is amenable to high intensity is
probably one of: running (especially up hills), swimming, rowing, biking, burpees, or
jump rope. But you might be able to adapt others. I'm a huge fan of rowing for a few
reasons. One, it works more than just the legs. Two, you can have a rowing machine in
your house, which drastically lowers activation cost. Three, I just ﬁnd it less aversive
subjectively. You can keep stationary bicycle mounts in your house as well, and they
have the advantages of being compact and very cheap if you already own a bike.
Burpees require no equipment, but they bothered my knees. They work great for
some people though. Jumping rope is also very space/time eﬃcient but the skill
required acts as something of a barrier. If you ﬁnd learning the skill enjoyable, it's a
great option. It is worth noting that runners, bikers, and rowers have among the best
VO2 max scores of any athletes.
What does the optimal high-intensity cardio routine look like? Data on this comes from
this Meta-analysis of VO2 max trainability. VO2 max has been shown to be a robust
predictor of mortality. This relation has held across elite athletes, to average
individuals, to the overweight (see Figure 2 from this meta-analysis of vo2 max
trainability). Unfortunately, it appears that the protocols eliciting the greatest

increases in VO2 max are so arduous as to have high attrition rates. 6 days/week is
not a schedule of training I expect anyone but professional athletes to maintain. What
sort of realistic routine can still achieve most of these gains? The meta-analysis
supports a mixture of 3-5 minute intervals, and longer duration but still intense
intervals (30-40 minutes of continuous training). The authors also note that they did
not include analysis of the evidence that very high intensity exercise (1 minute or less
of max eﬀort) shows unique health beneﬁts. We could simply conclude that a mixture
of interval times is good, and that every increment of cardio up to very high levels is
likely good for us, but that doesn't feel very motivating. What we want is a clear goal.
I'm going to combine data from the VO2 max study and the Swiss review to get a
rough estimate. If we want to do resistance training twice per week and cardio at least
twice per week can we realistically burn the 1500 calories we want? Let's see. Interval
training sessions can vary widely in number of calories burned, but a sprinting
session, a 4x4 protocol (one of the more popular protocols in the VO2 max meta
analysis, consisting of four 4-minute intervals), and a 30 minute run can burn between
200-450 calories as a ﬁrst approximation. Twice weekly and we have 400-900 calories.
This leaves 600-1100 calories for 2 weightlifting sessions. Estimates for calories
burned weightlifting vary extremely widely, most likely due to the huge number of
exercises considered "weightlifting", but even the lower estimates put it over 300
calories per hour. This puts 2-4 hours of weightlifting per week at 600-1200 calories
expended. How convenient!
All that remains is to suggest speciﬁc cardio routines. I don't have the evidence to say
with any conﬁdence what a truly optimal routine would look like here, but I can at
least give well studied examples of each.
Very high intensity routines follow a pattern of a short warmup (5 minutes at a slow
pace) followed by several bursts of 10-60 seconds all out intensity. (30 on 30 oﬀ for 10
intervals is popular and close to maximizing vV02max)
VO2 max interval training consists of four 3-5 minute intervals at 85%-95% your max
heart rate interspersed with slower jogging for the same interval.
Longer interval training consists of 20-40 minute runs at a consistent pace such that
you are exhausted by the end.
I wouldn't worry about the optimal frequency for each one. Don't forget that even
training populations just consistently doing one type shows very dramatic
improvements in health. I'd suggest freely mixing them up and trying to have fun with
it. 
 
Summary of my recommended routine
This is what I recommend gradually working towards once you've made exercise a
habit:
~1-2 hour weightlifting sessions 2-3x a week. (A third weightlifting session is
recommended for the ﬁrst several months, for both gaining strength and
building habits.)
~15-40 minutes of vigorous cardio 2-3x a week. 
Don't do vigorous cardio on the same day as lifting weights! It's a good way to injure
yourself, especially your lower back. Exercise doesn't make you stronger; it makes you

weaker. It's the recovery from exercise that makes you stronger; give your body time
to recover.
 
Nutrition
Don't try to implement a new diet and a new exercise plan at the same time. If you're
trying to choose, do an exercise plan ﬁrst—eﬀects on health are much larger.
If you are underweight or normal weight, you'll need to eat more when you start
exercising. Celebrate after your workouts by eating to reinforce the exercise habit. You
may think eating pizza is bad for you, but not exercising is worse, so reward yourself
however you want. Or drink my nutrient dense shake, designed to be consumed after
workouts. (John_Maxwell_IV and I are planning to commercialize it after we roll out our
ﬁrst nutritionally complete food.)
If you're overweight: I agree with Gary Taubes that exercise is NOT a good way to lose
weight. But exercise has bigger eﬀects on health than weight loss, so I actually
recommend prioritizing exercise over changing your diet. (Like I said, don't try to do
both at once.)
Note that you don't need to stuﬀ yourself with massive amounts of protein to build
muscle. Studies have never shown a measured beneﬁt to consumption above .64g/lb
of bodyweight, which translates to around 100g for a 150-160lb person. A single
serving (3oz) of chicken, for example, contains about 21g of protein.
 
 
If you've made it this far, congratulations; you are now as knowledgeable as any
personal trainer I've spoken with.

Political Skills which Increase Income
Summary: This article is intended for those who are "earning to give" (i.e. maximize income so that it can be donated to 
charity). It is basically an annotated bibliography of a few recent meta-analyses of predictors of income.
Key Results
The degree to which management "sponsors" your career development is an important predictor of your salary, 
as is how skilled you are politically.
Despite the stereotype of a silver-tongued salesman preying on people's biases, rational appeals are generally 
the best tactic.
After rationality, the best tactics are types of ingratiation, including flattery and acting modest.
Ng et al. performed a metastudy of over 200 individual studies of objective and subjective career success. Here are the 
variables they found best correlated with salary:
Predictor
Correlation
Political Knowledge & Skills
0.29
Education Level
0.29
Cognitive Ability (as measured by standardized tests)
0.27
Age
0.26
Training and Skill Development Opportunities
0.24
Hours Worked
0.24
Career Sponsorship
0.22
(all significant at p = .05)
(For reference, the "Big 5" personality traits all have a correlation under 0.12.)
Before we go on, a few caveats: while these correlations are significant and important, none are overwhelming (the 
authors cite Cohen as saying the range 0.24-0.36 is "medium" and correlations over 0.37 are "large"). Also, in addition 
to the usual correlation/causation concerns, there is lots of cross-correlation: e.g. older people might have greater 
political knowledge but less education, thereby confusing things. For a discussion of moderating variables, see the 
paper itself.
Career Sponsorship
There are two broad models of career advancement: contest-mobility and sponsorship-mobility. They are best 
illustrated with an example.
Suppose Peter and Penelope are both equally talented entry-level employees. Under the contest-mobility model, they 
would both be equally likely to get a raise or promotion, because they are equally skilled.
Sponsorship-mobility theorists argue that even if Peter and Penelope are equally talented, it's likely that one of them will 
catch the eye of senior management. Perhaps it's due to one of them having an early success by chance, making a 
joke in a meeting, or simply just having a more memorable name, like Penelope. This person will be singled out for 
additional training and job opportunities. Because of this, they'll have greater success in the company, which will lead to 
more opportunities etc. As a result, their initial small discrepancy in attention gets multiplied into a large differential.
The authors of the metastudy found that self-reported sponsorship levels (i.e. how much you feel the management of 
your company "sponsors" you) have a significant, although moderate, relationship to salary. Therefore, the level at 
which you currently feel sponsored in your job should be a factor when you consider alternate opportunities.
The Dilbert Eﬀect

The strongest predictor of salary (tied with education level) is what the authors politely term "Political Knowledge & 
Skills" - less politely, how good you are at manipulating others.
Several popular books (such as Cialdini's Influence) on the subject of influencing others exist, and the study of these 
"influence tactics" in business stretches back 30 years to Kipnis, Schmidt and Wilkinson. Recently, Higgins et al. 
reviewed 23 individual studies of these tactics and how they relate to career success. Their results:
Tactic
Correlation
Definition (From Higgins et al.)
Rationality
0.26
Using data and information to make a logical argument 
supporting one's request
Ingratiation
0.23
Using behaviors designed to increase the target's liking 
of oneself or to make oneself appear friendly in order to 
get what one wants
Upward Appeal
0.05
Relying on the chain of command, calling in superiors to 
help get one's way
Self-Promotion
0.01
Attempting to create an appearance of competence or 
that you are capable 
of completing a task
Assertiveness
-0.02
Using a forceful manner to get what one wants
Exchange
-0.03
Making an explicit offer to do something for another in 
exchange for their doing what 
one wants
(Only ingratiation and rationality are significant.)
This site has a lot of information on how to make rational appeals, so I will focus on the less-talked-about ingratiation 
techniques.
How to be Ingratiating
Gordon analyzed 69 studies of ingratiation and found the following. (Unlike the previous two sections, success here is 
measured in lab tests as well as in career advancement. However, similar but less comprehensive results have been 
found in terms of career success):
Tactic
Weighted Effectiveness (Cohen's 
d difference between control and 
intervention)
Description
Other 
Enhancement
0.31
Flattery
Opinion 
Conformity
0.23
"Go along to get along"
Self-
presentation
0.15
Any of the following tactics: Self-promotion, self-deprecation, 
apologies, positive nonverbal displays and name usage
Combination
0.10
Includes studies where the participants weren't told which 
strategy to use, in addition to when they were instructed to 
use multiple strategies
Rendering 
Favors
0.05
 
Self-presentation is split further:

Tactic
Weighted 
Effect Size
Comment
Modesty
0.77
Apology
0.59
Apologizing for poor performance
Generic
0.28
When the participant is told in generic terms to improve their self-presentation
Nonverbal behavior 
and name usage
-0.14
Nonverbal behavior includes things like wearing perfume. Name usage 
means referring to people by name instead of a pronoun.
Self-promotion
-0.17
 
 
Moderators
One important moderator is the direction of the appeal. If you are talking to your boss, your tactics should be different 
than if you're talking to a subordinate. Other-enhancement (flattery) is always the best tactic no matter who you're 
talking to, but when talking to superiors it's by far the best. When talking to those at similar levels to you, opinion 
conformity comes close to flattery, and the other techniques aren't far behind.
Unsurprisingly, when the target realizes you're being ingratiating, the tactic is less effective. (Although effectiveness 
doesn't go to zero - even when people realize you're flattering them just to suck up, they generally still appreciate it.) 
Also, women are better at being ingratiating than men, and men are more influenced by these ingratiating tactics than 
women. The most important caveat is that lab studies find much larger effect sizes than in the field, to the extent that 
the average field effect for the ingratiating tactics is negative. This is probably due to the fact that lab experiments can 
be better controlled.
Conclusion
It's unlikely that a silver-tongued receptionist will out-earn an introverted engineer. But simple techniques like flattery 
and attempting to get "sponsored" can appreciably improve returns, to the extent that political skills are one of the 
strongest predictors of salaries.
 
I would like to thank Brian Tomasik and Gina Stuessy for reading early drafts of this
article.
References
Cohen, Jacob. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Psychology Press, 1988.
 
Gordon, Randall A. "Impact of ingratiation on judgments and evaluations: A meta-analytic investigation." Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 71.1 (1996): 54.
 
Higgins, Chad A., Timothy A. Judge, and Gerald R. Ferris. "Influence tactics and work outcomes: a meta‐analysis." Journal of
Organizational Behavior 24.1 (2003): 89-106.
 
Judge, Timothy A., and Robert D. Bretz Jr. "Political influence behavior and career success." Journal of Management 20.1 (1994):
43-65.
 
Kipnis, David, Stuart M. Schmidt, and Ian Wilkinson. "Intraorganizational influence tactics: Explorations in getting one's way." Journal
of Applied psychology 65.4 (1980): 440.
Ng, Thomas WH, et al. "Predictors of objective and subjective career success: A meta‐analysis." Personnel psychology 58.2 (2005):
367-408.

A vote against spaced repetition
LessWrong seems to be a big fan of spaced-repetition ﬂashcard programs like Anki,
Supermemo, or Mnemosyne. I used to be. After using them religiously for 3 years in
medical school, I now categorically advise against using them for large volumes of
memorization.
[A caveat before people get upset: I think they appropriate in certain situations, and I
have not tried to use them to learn a language, which seems its most popular use.
More at the bottom.]
A bit more history: I and 30 other students tried using Mnemosyne (and some used
Anki) for multiple tests. At my school, we have a test approximately every 3 weeks,
and each test covers about 75 pages of high-density outline-format notes. Many
stopped after 5 or so such tests, citing that they simply did not get enough returns
from their time. I stuck with it longer and used them more than anyone else, using
them for 3 years.
Incidentally, I failed my ﬁrst year and had to repeat.
By the end of that third year (and studying for my Step 1 boards, a several-month
process), I lost faith in spaced-repetition cards as an eﬀective tool for my
memorization demands. I later met with a learning-skills specialist, who felt the same
way, and had better reasons than my intuition/trial-and-error:
Flashcards are less useful to learning the "big picture"
Speciﬁcally, if you are memorizing a large amount of information, there is often
a hierarchy, organization, etc that can make leaning the whole thing easier, and
you loose the constant visual reminder of the larger context when using
ﬂashcards.
Flashcards do not take advantage of spatial, mapping, or visual memory, all of
which the human mind is much better optimized for. It is not so well built to
memorize pairs between seemingly arbitrary concepts with few to no intuitive
links. My preferred methods are, in essence, hacks that use your visual and
spatial memory rather than rote.
Here are examples of the typical kind of things I memorize every day and have found
ﬂashcards to be surprisingly worthless for:
The deﬁnition of Sjögren's syndrome
The contraindications of Metronidazole
The signiﬁcance of a rise in serum αFP
Here is what I now use in place of ﬂashcards :
1. Ven diagrams/etc, to compare and contrast similar lists. (This is more speciﬁc to
medical school, when you learn subtly diﬀerent diseases.)
2. Mnemonic pictures. I have used this myself for years to great eﬀect, and later
learned it was taught by my study-skills expert, though I'm surprised I haven't
found them formally named and taught anywhere else. The basic concept is to
make a large picture, where each detail on the picture corresponds to a detail
you want to memorize.

3. Memory palaces. I recently learned how to properly use these, and I'm a true
believer. When I only had the general idea to "pair things you want to memorize
with places in your room" I found it worthless, but after I was taught a lot of do's
and don'ts, they're now my favorite way to memorize any list of 5+ items. If
there's enough demand on LW I can write up a summary.
Spaced repetition is still good for knowledge you need to retrieve immediately, when a
2-second delay would make it useless. I would still consider spaced-repetition to
memorize some of the more rarely-used notes on the treble and bass clef, if I ever
decide to learn to sight-read music properly. I make no comment on it's usefulness to
learn a foreign language, as I haven't tried it, but if I were to pick one up I personally
would start with a rosetta-stone-esque program.
Your mileage may vary, but after seeing so many people try and reject them, I ﬁgured
it was enough data to share. Mnemonic pictures and memory palaces are slightly time
consuming when you're learning them. However, if someone has the motivation and
discipline to make a stack of ﬂashcards and study them every day indeﬁnitely, then I
believe learning and using those skills is a far better use of time.

Self-Congratulatory Rationalism
Quite a few people complain about the atheist/skeptic/rationalist communities being
self-congratulatory. I used to dismiss this as a sign of people's unwillingness to admit
that rejecting religion, or astrology, or whatever, was any more rational than
accepting those things. Lately, though, I've started to worry.
Frankly, there seem to be a lot of people in the LessWrong community who imagine
themselves to be, not just more rational than average, but paragons of rationality who
other people should accept as such. I've encountered people talking as if it's ridiculous
to suggest they might sometimes respond badly to being told the truth about certain
subjects. I've encountered people asserting the rational superiority of themselves and
others in the community for ﬂimsy reasons, or no reason at all.
Yet the readiness of members of the LessWrong community to disagree with and
criticize each other suggests we don't actually think all that highly of each other's
rationality. The fact that members of the LessWrong community tend to be smart is no
guarantee that they will be rational. And we have much reason to fear "rationality"
degenerating into signaling games.
What Disagreement Signiﬁes
Let's start by talking about disagreement. There's been a lot of discussion of
disagreement on LessWrong, and in particular of Aumann's agreement theorem, often
glossed as something like "two rationalists can't agree to disagree." (Or perhaps that
we can't foresee to disagree.) Discussion of disagreement, however, tends to focus on
what to do about it. I'd rather take a step back, and look at what disagreement tells us
about ourselves: namely, that we don't think all that highly of each other's rationality.
This, for me, is the take-away from Tyler Cowen and Robin Hanson's paper Are
Disagreements Honest? In the paper, Cowen and Hanson deﬁne honest disagreement
as meaning that "meaning that the disputants respect each other's relevant abilities,
and consider each person's stated opinion to be his best estimate of the truth, given
his information and eﬀort," and they argue disagreements aren't honest in this sense.
I don't ﬁnd this conclusion surprising. In fact, I suspect that while people sometimes
do mean it when they talk about respectful disagreement, often they realize this is a
polite ﬁction (which isn't necessarily a bad thing). Deep down, they know that
disagreement is disrespect, at least in the sense of not thinking that highly of the
other person's rationality. That people know this is shown in the fact that they don't
like being told they're wrong—the reason why Dale Carnegie says you can't win an
argument. 
On LessWrong, people are quick to criticize each others' views, so much so that I've
heard people cite this as a reason to be reluctant to post/comment (again showing
they know intuitively that disagreement is disrespect). Furthermore when people in
LessWrong criticize others' views, they very often don't seem to expect to quickly
reach agreement. Even people Yvain would classify as "experienced
rationalists" sometimes knowingly have persistent disagreements. This suggests that
LessWrongers almost never consider each other to be perfect rationalists.

And I actually think this is a sensible stance. For one thing, even if you met a perfect
rationalist, it could be hard to ﬁgure out that they are one. Furthermore, the problem
of knowing what to do about disagreement is made harder when you're faced with
other people having persistent disagreements: if you ﬁnd yourself agreeing with Alice,
you'll have to think Bob is being irrational, and vice versa. If you rate them equally
rational and adopt an intermediate view, you'll have to think they're both being a bit
irrational for not doing likewise.
The situation is similar to Moore's paradox in philosophy—the impossibility of
asserting "it's raining, but I don't believe it's raining." Or, as you might say, "Of course
I think my opinions are right and other people's are wrong. Otherwise I'd change my
mind." Similarly, when we think about disagreement, it seems like we're forced to say,
"Of course I think my opinions are rational and other people's are irrational. Otherwise
I'd change my mind."
We can ﬁnd some room for humility in an analog of the preface paradox, the fact that
the author of a book can say things like "any errors that remain are mine." We can say
this because we might think each individual claim in the book is highly probable, while
recognize that all the little uncertainties add up to it being likely there are still errors.
Similarly, we can think each of our beliefs are individually rational, while recognizing
we still probably have some irrational beliefs—we just don't know which ones And just
because respectful disagreement is a polite ﬁction doesn't mean we should abandon
it. 
I don't have a clear sense of how controversial the above will be. Maybe we all already
recognize that we don't respect each other's opinions 'round these parts. But I think
some features of discussion at LessWrong look odd in light of the above points about
disagreement—including some of the things people say about disagreement.
The wiki, for example, says that "Outside of well-functioning prediction markets,
Aumann agreement can probably only be approximated by careful deliberative
discourse. Thus, fostering eﬀective deliberation should be seen as a key goal of Less
Wrong." The point of Aumann's agreement theorem, though, is precisely that ideal
rationalists shouldn't need to engage in deliberative discourse, as usually conceived,
in order to reach agreement.
As Cowen and Hanson put it, "Merely knowing someone else's opinion provides a
powerful summary of everything that person knows, powerful enough to eliminate any
diﬀerences of opinion due to diﬀering information." So sharing evidence the normal
way shouldn't be necessary. Asking someone "what's the evidence for that?" implicitly
says, "I don't trust your rationality enough to take your word for it." But when dealing
with real people who may or may not have a rational basis for their beliefs, that's
almost always the right stance to take.
Intelligence and Rationality
Intelligence does not equal rationality. Need I say more? Not long ago, I wouldn't have
thought so. I would have thought it was a fundamental premise behind LessWrong,
indeed behind old-school scientiﬁc skepticism. As Michael Shermer once said, "Smart
people believe weird things because they are skilled at defending beliefs they arrived
at for non-smart reasons."

Yet I've heard people suggest that you must never be dismissive of things said by
smart people, or that the purportedly high IQ of the LessWrong community means
people here don't make bad arguments. When I hear that, I think "whaaat? People on
LessWrong make bad arguments all the time!" When this happens, I generally limit
myself to trying to point out the ﬂaw in the argument and/or downvoting, and resist
the urge to shout "YOUR ARGUMENTS ARE BAD AND YOU SHOULD FEEL BAD." I just
think it.
When I reach for an explanation of why terrible arguments from smart people
shouldn't surprise anyone, I go to Yvain's Intellectual Hipsters and Meta-Contarianism,
one of my favorite LessWrong posts of all time. While Yvain notes that meta-
contrarianism often isn't a good thing, though, on re-reading it I noticed what seems
like an important oversight:
A person who is somewhat upper-class will conspicuously signal eir wealth by
buying diﬃcult-to-obtain goods. A person who is very upper-class will
conspicuously signal that ey feels no need to conspicuously signal eir wealth, by
deliberately not buying diﬃcult-to-obtain goods.
A person who is somewhat intelligent will conspicuously signal eir intelligence by
holding diﬃcult-to-understand opinions. A person who is very intelligent will
conspicuously signal that ey feels no need to conspicuously signal eir intelligence,
by deliberately not holding diﬃcult-to-understand opinions.
According to the survey, the average IQ on this site is around 145. People on this
site diﬀer from the mainstream in that they are more willing to say death is bad,
more willing to say that science, capitalism, and the like are good, and less willing
to say that there's some deep philosophical sense in which 1+1 = 3. That
suggests people around that level of intelligence have reached the point where
they no longer feel it necessary to diﬀerentiate themselves from the sort of people
who aren't smart enough to understand that there might be side beneﬁts to
death.
The pattern of countersignaling Yvain describes here is real. But it's important not to
forget that sometimes, the super-wealthy signal their wealth by buying things even
the moderately wealthy can't aﬀord. And sometimes, the very intelligent signal their
intelligence by holding opinions even the moderately intelligent have trouble
understanding. You also get hybrid status moves: designer versions of normally low-
class clothes, complicated justiﬁcations for opinions normally found among the
uneducated.
Robin Hanson has argued that this leads to biases in academia:
I've argued that the main social function of academia is to let students, patrons,
readers, etc. aﬃliate with credentialed-as-impressive minds. If so, academic
beliefs are secondary - the important thing is to clearly show respect to those who
make impressive displays like theorems or diﬃcult data analysis. And the obvious
way for academics to use their beliefs to show respect for impressive folks is to
have academic beliefs track the most impressive recent academic work.
Robin's post focuses on economics, but I suspect the problem is even worse in my
home ﬁeld of philosophy. As I've written before, the problem is that in philosophy,
philosophers never agree on whether a philosopher has solved a problem. Therefore,
there can be no rewards for being right, only rewards for showing oﬀ your impressive
intellect. This often means ﬁnding clever ways to be wrong.

I need to emphasize that I really do think philosophers are showing oﬀ real
intelligence, not merely showing oﬀ faux-cleverness. GRE scores suggest philosophers
are among the smartest academics, and their performance is arguably made more
impressive by the fact that GRE quant scores are bimodally distributed based on
whether your major required you to spend four years practicing your high school
math, with philosophy being one of the majors that doesn't grant that advantage.
Based on this, if you think it's wrong to dismiss the views of high-IQ people, you
shouldn't be dismissive of mainstream philosophy. But in fact I think LessWrong's oft-
noticed dismissiveness of mainstream philosophy is largely justiﬁed.
I've found philosophy of religion in particular to be a goldmine of terrible arguments
made by smart people. Consider Alvin Plantinga's modal ontological argument. The
argument is suﬃciently diﬃcult to understand that I won't try to explain it here. If you
want to understand it, I'm not sure what to tell you except to maybe read Plantinga's
book The Nature of Necessity. In fact, I predict at least one LessWronger will comment
on this thread with an incorrect explanation or criticism of the argument. Which is not
to say they wouldn't be smart enough to understand it, just that it might take them a
few iterations of getting it wrong to ﬁnally get it right. And coming up with an
argument like that is no mean feat—I'd guess Plantinga's IQ is just as high as the
average LessWronger's.
Once you understand the modal ontological argument, though, it quickly becomes
obvious that Plantinga's logic works just as well to "prove" that it's a necessary truth
that pigs ﬂy. Or that Plantinga's god does not exist. Or even as a general purpose
"proof" of any purported mathematical truth you please. The main point is that
Plantinga's argument is not stupid in the sense of being something you'd only come
up with if you had a low IQ—the opposite is true. But Plantinga's argument is stupid in
the sense of being something you'd only come up with it while under the inﬂuence of
some serious motivated reasoning.
The modal ontological argument is admittedly an extreme case. Rarely is the chasm
between the diﬃculty of the concepts underlying an argument, and the argument's
actual merits, so vast. Still, beware the temptation to aﬃliate with smart people by
taking everything they say seriously.
Edited to add: in the original post, I intended but forgot to emphasize that I
think the correlation between IQ and rationality is weak at best. Do people
disagree? Does anyone want to go out on a limb and say, "They aren't the
same thing, but the correlation is still very strong?"
The Principle of Charity
I've made no secret of the fact that I'm not a big fan of the principle of charity—often
deﬁned as the rule that you should interpret other people's arguments on the
assumption that they are not saying anything stupid. The problem with this is that
other people are often saying something stupid. Because of that, I think charitable is
over-rated compared to fair and accurate reading. When someone says something
stupid, you don't have to pretend otherwise, but it's really important not to attribute
to people stupid things they never said.
More frustrating than this simple disagreement over charity, though, is when people
who invoke the principle of charity do so selectively. They apply it to people who's
views they're at least somewhat sympathetic to, but when they ﬁnd someone they

want to attack, they have trouble meeting basic standards of fairness. And in the most
frustrating cases, this gets explicit justiﬁcation: "we need to read these people
charitably, because they are obviously very intelligent and rational." I once had a
member of the LessWrong community actually tell me, "You need to interpret me
more charitably, because you know I'm sane." "Actually, buddy, I don't know that," I
wanted to reply—but didn't, because that would've been rude.
I can see beneﬁts to the principle of charity. It helps avoid ﬂame wars, and from a
Machiavellian point of view it's nice to close oﬀ the "what I actually meant was..."
responses. Whatever its merits, though, they can't depend on the actual intelligence
and rationality of the person making an argument. Not only is intelligence no
guarantee against making bad arguments, the whole reason we demand other people
tell us their reasons for their opinions in the ﬁrst place is we fear their reasons might
be bad ones.
As I've already explained, there's a diﬃcult problem here about how to be
appropriately modest about our own rationality. When I say something, I never think
it's stupid, otherwise I wouldn't say it. But at least I'm not so arrogant as to go around
demanding other people acknowledge my highly advanced rationality. I don't demand
that they accept "Chris isn't saying anything stupid" as an axiom in order to engage
with me.
Beware Weirdness for Weirdness'
Sake
There's a theory in the psychology and sociology of religion that the purpose of
seemingly foolish rituals like circumcision and snake-handling is to provide a costly
and therefore hard-to-fake signal of group commitment. I think I've heard it suggested
—though I can't ﬁnd by who—that crazy religious doctrines could serve a similar
purpose. It's easy to say you believe in a god, but being willing to risk ridicule by
saying you believe in one god who is three persons, who are all the same god, yet not
identical to each other, and you can't explain how that is but it's a mystery you accept
on faith... now that takes dedication.
Once you notice the general "signal group commitment in costly ways" strategy, it
seems to crop up everywhere. Subcultures often seem to go out of their way to be
weird, to do things that will shock people outside the subculture, ranging from tattoos
and weird clothing to coming up with reasons why things regarded as normal and
innocuous in the broader culture are actually evil. Even something as simple as a
large body of jargon and in-jokes can do the trick: if someone takes the time to learn
all the jargon and in-jokes, you know they're committed.
This tendency is probably harmless when done with humor and self-awareness, but it's
more worrisome when a group becomes convinced its little bits of weirdness for
weirdness' sake are a sign of its superiority to other groups. And it's worth being
aware of, because it makes sense of signaling moves that aren't straightforwardly
plays for higher status.
The LessWrong community has amassed a truly impressive store of jargon and in-
jokes over the years, and some of it's quite useful (I reiterate my love for the term
"meta-contrarian"). But as with all jargon, LessWrongian jargon is often just a silly way

of saying things you could have said without it. For example, people say "I have a poor
mental model of..." when they could have just said they don't understand it very well.
That bit of LessWrong jargon is merely silly. Worse, I think, is the jargon around
politics. Recently, a friend gave "they avoid blue-green politics" as a reason
LessWrongians are more rational than other people. It took a day before it clicked that
"blue-green politics" here basically just meant "partisanship." But complaining about
partisanship is old hat—literally. America's founders were fretting about it back in the
18th century. Nowadays, such worries are something you expect to hear from boringly
middle-brow columnists at major newspapers, not edgy contrarians.
But "blue-green politics," "politics is the mind-killer"... never mind how much content
they add, the point is they're obscure enough to work as an excuse to feel superior to
anyone whose political views are too mainstream. Outsiders will probably think you're
weird, invoking obscure jargon to quickly dismiss ideas that seem plausible to them,
but on the upside you'll get to bond with members of your in-group over your feelings
of superiority.
A More Humble Rationalism?
I feel like I should wrap up with some advice. Unfortunately, this post was motivated
by problems I'd seen, not my having thought of brilliant solutions to them. So I'll limit
myself to some fairly boring, non-brilliant advice.
First, yes, some claims are more rational than others. Some people even do better at
rationality overall than others. But the idea of a real person being anything close to an
ideal rationalist is an extraordinary claim, and should be met with appropriate
skepticism and demands for evidence. Don't forget that.
Also, beware signaling games. A good dose of Hansonian cynicism, applied to your
own in-group, is healthy. Somewhat relatedly, I've begun to wonder if "rationalism" is
really good branding for a movement. Rationality is systematized winning, sure, but
the "rationality" branding isn't as good for keeping that front and center, especially
compared to, say the eﬀective altruism meme. It's just a little too easy to forget where
"rationality" is supposed to connect with the real world, increasing the temptation for
"rationality" to spiral oﬀ into signaling games.

Less Wrong Study Hall - Year 1
Retrospective
Some time back, a small group of Less Wrongers collected in a video chatroom to
work on...things. We've been at it for exactly one year as of today, and it seems like a
good time to see what's come of it.[1] So here is what we've done, what we're doing,
and a few thoughts on where we're going. At the end is a survey taken of the LWSH,
partly to be compared to Less Wrong proper, but mostly for fun. If you like what you
see here, come join us. The password is "lw".
A Brief History of the Hall
I think the ﬁrst inspiration was Eliezer looking for someone to sit with him while he
worked, to help with productivity and akrasia. Shannon Friedman answered the call
and it seemed to be eﬀective. She suggested a similar coworking scheme to one of
her clients, Mqrius, to help him with akratic issues surrounding his thesis. She posted
on Less Wrong about it, with the intent of connecting him and possibly others who
wanted to co-work in a similar fashion. Tsakinis, in the comments, took the idea a step
further, and created a Tinychat video chatroom for group working. It was titled the
Less Wrong Study Hall. The theory is that it will help us actually do the work, instead
of, say, reading tvtropes when we should be studying. It turned out to be a decent
Schelling point, enough to form a regular group and occasionally attract new people.
It's grown slowly but steadily.
Tinychat's software sucks, and there have been a couple of eﬀorts to replace it.
Mqrius looked into OpenMeetings, but it didn't work out. Yours truly took a crack at
programming a LWSH Google Hangout, but it ran aground on technical diﬃculties.
Meanwhile the tinychat room continued to work, and despite nobody actually liking it,
it's done the job well enough.
Tinychat is publicly available, and there have been occasional issues with the public
along the way. A few people took up modding, but it was still a nuisance. Eventually a
password was placed on the room, which mostly shut down the problem. We did have
one guy straight out guess the password, which was a...peculiar experience. He was
notably not all there, but somehow still scrupulously polite, and left when asked. I
don't think I've ever seen that happen on the Internet before.
A year after the Hall opened, we have about twenty to twenty-ﬁve regulars, with an
unknown number of occasional users. We're still well within Dunbar's number, so
everybody knows everybody else and new users integrate quickly. We've developed a
reasonably ﬁrm set of social norms to guide our work, in spite of not having direct
technical control nor clear leaders.
The story thus far has been a pretty good one. I'm looking forward to Year Two.
Current MO and Social Norms
No one went out of their way to come up with these and nobody is really enforcing
them, but it's how the group currently behaves.

We adopted the Pomodoro Technique early on to organize our work. We run 32-minute
pomodoros instead of the usual 25 (I have no idea how this custom originated; I'm told
it was Dentin's idea though), interspersed with eight minute breaks that tend to run
over as often as not. Sometimes, we'll run a longer or shorter pomo if someone
requests it. When you enter the room, ask for the current time. Usually at least one
person will notice and respond with the endpoint of the current pomo, expressed in
minutes-past-the-hour to be applicable across time zones.[2]
Don't talk during pomos without good cause. Asking for the current time is good
cause; so is saying a brief goodbye when you leave. If someone else is talking enough
to be distracting, it's acceptable to ask them to save it for the next break. Otherwise,
insert nose in grindstone.
During breaks, talk as much as you want. Talking about what you're working on is
explicitly encouraged. Bragging about something you've just completed is also
explicitly encouraged. In the absence of those two things, though, it's okay to just be
social.[3]
Anyone who notices that the break has ended can start the next pomo just by stating
its length and end time. Usually one or two self-selected people will keep the rest of
the room on track in this regard. If the break runs over and you're the ﬁrst to notice,
speak up even if you don't want to be responsible for the clock; it's good form to cut
the chitchat quickly once someone has noted that it's time to get back to work.
Most of us keep our cameras on in the room, and I encourage new users to do the
same. Having someone watch you work seems to improve motivation and reduce the
temptation to slack. Your presence will be more obvious, which helps if you happen to
be new and are scrolled oﬀ the bottom of the user list. It also encourages others to
interact with you; socialization during breaks is easier and works better when you can
see people's expressions. As noted in the survey below, that sort of social
reinforcement is a big plus. In lieu of a camera, some users display their working
desktop instead, but this is rare and seems to require a third party program. If you like
privacy, keeping everything oﬀ is okay too; just be aware that you're avoiding a useful
tool.
Bullet point version of the above:
Say hello and ask for the current time when entering.
Don't talk during pomos.
Do talk during breaks.
Talking about work is encouraged.
Bragging about work is encouraged.
Don't turn your mic on.
But do turn your camera or desktop view on if you want.
Personal Reﬂections
It's been an interesting ﬁrst year. I'm part of a tribe as it begins to cohere, and I like it.
Is it eﬀective? Good question. I enjoy the environment but that doesn't mean it's
succeeding at what it's supposed to do: help akratics Get Stuﬀ Done. I feel like it's
eﬀective, but being sure of that is hard. I've certainly written more in the last year
than the previous ten. I do use a couple of other productivity hacks, especially

Beeminder, and in fact I frequently work on Beeminded tasks in the Hall. Someone
(jkadlubo?) mentioned that they didn't like Beeminder because it was all stick and no
carrot. For me, the study hall is the carrot. I like working alongside other people.
We have a lot of students, which is unsurprising given that we splintered oﬀ Less
Wrong and Less Wrong also has a lot of students. This makes me wonder what will
happen when our users begin to graduate.
Tinychat, as a technology, sucks. Unfortunately it's the best existing software that
does what we want, by virtue of being the only existing software that does what we
want (Google Hangouts, the most obvious alternative, does not work for our purposes
as mentioned above), and at least two attempts to replace it have failed. I believe this
is because, while Tinychat is annoying, it's not annoying enough for anyone to put in
the relatively large eﬀort that seems to be required to replace it - especially since the
room is self-selected for akratic problems in the ﬁrst place. The most promising
alternative tech I can ﬁnd is XMPP Muji, a standard for multi-user video chat services,
but the standard's approval is deferred and I'm not sure why. A cursory Google search
does not turn up any software that implements it.
One of the problems brought up when the room was ﬁrst proposed was that people
might end up using the Hall to socialize rather than work. The concern was justiﬁed, at
least partially; we routinely run over breaks talking. But we seem to have countered
that with a fairly strong norm of stopping the break as soon as someone notices. As
we've all gotten to know each other better, the atmosphere during the breaks has
become quite social. I would blame our break-overruns on this, except I'm pretty sure
that has been happening since the start. Nevertheless there has been some concern
that the more-social atmosphere has been distracting people from actually working. I
asked about this in the survey, but the answers were heavily slanted towards "not
terribly distracting." (no higher than a 3 on a 1-5 scale, and only three 3's) This leads
me to believe that there are more people concerned that others might be bothered
than there are others who are actually bothered. It is possible there is a selection
eﬀect whereby the people irritated leave and never took the survey; but the change in
atmosphere has been relatively recent, and I haven't noticed an exodus of regulars.
Additionally, the single largest draw reported is social reinforcement for working. I
think the social atmosphere is probably a net positive, although it would be good if we
could technologically enforce break limits. Several other people noted that in the
suggestion box; unfortunately it is not possible without replacing Tinychat. Which was
also a common item in the suggestion box.
We've lost some users along the way (including the original creator, I think), but a
near-majority of the room has been around since almost the beginning. That seems to
suggest that people who try it out for more than a few cursory sessions stick around.
We'll begin to see if that's the case next year, with repeat survey-takers.
Survey and Results
Yvain's Less Wrong 2013 Survey results came out as the one year mark was
approaching, and it seemed to me that it would be fun, if maybe not all that useful, to
collect the same sort of information about the Hall. So, I did. The survey was open for
about three weeks and publicized during Hall breaks by myself and a few other
people. You can see the questions used here. I ﬂagrantly plagiarized many of the
questions from Yvain's survey (with permission, and thank you), because it seemed
like comparing the Hall to Less Wrong proper would be interesting. I took out a few

sections that I didn't feel were relevant and added a couple of Study Hall speciﬁc
sections. There is also some silliness at the end.
We had 23 responses. I counted 22 unique users in the room over the period the
survey was open. Assuming there are at least some people I did not see during that
time (owing to diﬀering schedules) I would guess our actual recurring population is
around 30, of which perhaps 20 show up regularly. I have noticed an inﬂux of new
faces in the last week or two; I sort of wish I'd run this a month later.
With such a small population it would be fairly easy for community members to de-
anonymize people. Respondents were warned of that, but I would still appreciate it if
people didn't go out of their way to try and connect responses to names.
The results are below. My comments are in brackets.
Demographics
Age
Mean
23.4
Stddev
4.2
Min
17
1st quartile 20.5
2nd quartile 23
3rd quartile 26.5
Max
32
[[ Our youngest user is 17 and our oldest is 32, at least among respondents. I feel old
now. ]]
Country
Australia
2
9%
Canada
1
4%
Finland
0
0%
France
0
0%
Germany
8
35%
Israel
0
0%
New Zealand
0
0%
Poland
2
9%
Russia
0
0%
United Kingdom 1
4%
United States
4
17%
Other
5
22%
[[ I don't know why we're so hugely concentrated in Germany. I think it might be one
cluster of people all referring each other. ]]
Race
Asian (East Asian)
0
0%

Asian (Indian Subcontinent) 0
0%
Middle Eastern
0
0%
Black
0
0%
White (non-Hispanic)
21
100%
White (Hispanic)
0
0%
Other
0
0%
[[ I'm sure I've seen at least one non-white person...but still. ]]
Sex, Gender, Relationships
I considered not including this section as irrelevant and possibly touchy, especially
given how easy it would be to de-anonymize people. Someone (I think tkadlubo)
pointed out that Less Wrongers in general are interested in relationship hacking. I
ended up making it optional, but everybody answered it anyway.
Sex
Male
18
78%
Female 5
22%
Other
0
0%
Gender
Male (cisgender)
18
78%
Female (cisgender)
5
22%
Male (transgender f->m)
0
0%
Female (transgender m->f) 0
0%
Other
0
0%
Sexual Orientation
Heterosexual 16
70%
Homosexual 0
0%
Bisexual
2
9%
Asexual
1
4%
Other
4
17%
Relationship Style
Prefer monogamous
5
22%
Prefer polyamorous
8
35%
Uncertain / no preference 10
43%
Other
0
0%
[[ All but two of our polyamorous folks were from Europe, and one of those two was
me. Clearly I need to move to Europe. ]]
Number of Current Partners
0
13
62%

1
3
14%
2
5
24%
Relationship Goals
...and currently looking for more relationship partners
13
59%
...and currently not looking for more relationship partners 6
27%
Other
3
14%
[[ Bonus points to whoever answered "that's complicated." Also, if I'd been thinking I
would have included an option for "not looking, but open to the possibility." ]]
Relationship Status
Single
14
61%
Relationship 6
26%
Married
3
13%
Other
0
0%
Children
0
20
87%
1
1
4%
2
2
9%
More Children
Yes
6
27%
No
8
36%
Uncertain 8
36%
Work and Education
Work Status
Student
14
61%
Academics (on the teaching side) 0
0%
Self-employed
2
9%
Independently wealthy
0
0%
Non-proﬁt work
0
0%
For-proﬁt work
5
22%
Government work
0
0%
Homemaking
1
4%
Unemployed
0
0%
Other
1
4%
Profession
Philosophy
0
0%
Finance / Economics
2
9%
Statistics
0
0%

Computers (AI)
0
0%
Computers (other academic, computer science) 1
4%
Computers (practical: IT, programming, etc.)
8
35%
Physics
1
4%
Biology
3
13%
Medicine
1
4%
Mathematics
2
9%
Neuroscience
2
9%
Other "hard science"
0
0%
Psychology
0
0%
Other "social science"
1
4%
Engineering
2
9%
Business
0
0%
Law
0
0%
Art
0
0%
Other
0
0%
Degree
None
1
5%
High School
10
45%
2 year degree
2
9%
Bachelor's
2
9%
Master's
6
27%
PH D.
1
5%
MD/JD/other professional degree 0
0%
Other
0
0%
Less Wrong
I wanted to get an idea of how our splinter tribe relates to Less Wrong as a whole, so I
included enough of a subset of that section from the main survey to do so.
Less Wrong Use
Doesn't use LW
1
5%
Lurker (no account)
6
29%
Lurker (account)
1
5%
Poster (comments only) 5
24%
Poster (discussion)
8
38%
Poster (Main)
0
0%
Time in Community (LW, years)
Mean
1.9
Stddev
1.06
Min
0.2

1st quartile 1
2nd quartile 2
3rd quartile 2.75
Max
4
Karma Score
Mean
183.1
Stddev
265.5
Min
0
1st quartile 0.5
2nd quartile 60
3rd quartile 251
Max
800
Meetups
Yes, regularly.
3
15%
Yes, once or a few times. 6
30%
No.
11
55%
Community (LW)
Yes, all the time. 4
20%
Yes, sometimes. 8
40%
No.
8
40%
Took the main LW survey?
Yes
12
60%
No
8
40%
Less Wrong Study Hall
The meat lies here.
Time in Community (LWSH)
Less than a month. 3
13%
1 - 3 months
4
17%
4 - 6 months
3
13%
6 - 9 months
4
17%
9 - 12 months
9
39%
Frequency
Every day
8
35%
Several times a week
9
39%
Once or twice a week
1
4%
Less than once a week
1
4%
It varies
3
13%

I haven't been here long enough to form a pattern 1
4%
Time in the Hall (per visit, in minutes)
Mean
226.1
Stddev
137.1
Min
60
1st quartile 120
2nd quartile 180
3rd quartile 300
Max
540
[[ NINE HOURS??! O_O I salute you. ]]
Usage
Academic studies
18
27%
Personal projects
21
32%
Deliberate practice (e.g. learning guitar) 4
6%
Work for an employer
5
8%
Chores, paperwork, or other necessities 17
26%
Other
1
2%
[[ I was surprised so many people use it for chores and the like. I do, but I thought I
was just about the only one. On the plus side, my home actually gets cleaned up
regularly now... ]]
Usage 2 (most important)
Academic studies
12
55%
Personal projects
5
23%
Deliberate practice (e.g. learning guitar) 0
0%
Work for an employer
3
14%
Chores, paperwork, or other necessities 2
9%
Other
0
0%
[[ Unsurprisingly, academics is the big thing. ]]
Draw
Social reinforcement for working.
22
33%
Social punishment for not working.
7
10%
Camera-induced self-consciousness when working. 15
22%
Distraction reduction via group pomodoros.
18
27%
Other
5
7%
Draw 2 (most important)
Social reinforcement for working.
14
61%
Social punishment for not working.
0
0%
Camera-induced self-consciousness when working. 1
4%

Distraction reduction via group pomodoros.
7
30%
Other
1
4%
[[ The carrot is more appreciated than the stick. ]]
Camera
Yes, always.
11
48%
Yes, sometimes. 10
43%
Rarely
1
4%
Never
1
4%
[[ I should have asked about desktop sharing too. I have a suspicion that it works even
better than cameras, but only one or two people do it. ]]
Camera Oﬀ (why?)
This was a freeform response about why users leave their cameras oﬀ. Most users do
leave their cameras on so there wasn't a lot to go on here. Included themes were
privacy (for oneself or others nearby), temporary non-working states (as when
someone is eating), technical diﬃculties, or just generally not feeling sociable.
Time Zone
UTC+10:00 2
9%
UTC+02:00 1
4.5%
UTC+01:00 13
60%
UTC+00:00 1
4.5%
UTC-05:00 5
23%
[[ Apparently all our American users are on the east coast? Perhaps the West Coast
people that might be interested already have access to the main real-life Less Wrong
community/CFAR people, and thus don't need the Hall. But I thought we had at least
one guy in the West. I am confused. ]]
Temporal Habits (Weekdays)
Mornings (6am-12pm)
6
15%
Afternoons (12pm-5pm)
9
22%
Evenings (5pm-10pm)
18
44%
Late night/very early morning (10pm-6am) 6
15%
Too variable to say
2
5%
I don't use the room during the week
0
0%
Temporal Habits (Weekends)
Mornings (6am-12pm)
4
10%
Afternoons (12pm-5pm)
11
26%
Evenings (5pm-10pm)
13
31%
Late night/very early morning (10pm-6am) 6
14%
Too variable to say
7
17%
I don't use the room on weekends
1
2%

[[ I meant to use time zone information and logon windows to ﬁgure out when the
room is populated and not, but never got around to it. Maybe next year. Or someone
else could do the honors. ]]
Referrals
The initial announcement
9
39%
Other comments or posts on Less Wrong 7
30%
Referred by a friend or partner
6
26%
Referred by a non-LW blog
0
0%
Referred by a search engine
0
0%
Other
1
4%
Interaction (outside the Hall)
Yes, regularly.
9
39%
Yes, sometimes. 7
30%
No.
7
30%
Interaction 2 (in person only)
Yes, regularly.
5
22%
Yes, sometimes.
5
22%
I've met a few people in person once or twice. 2
9%
No.
11
48%
[[ It looks like more people here get involved in-person than Less Wrong as a whole,
but it looks like it might be because all our Germans know each other in real life. ]]
Romance
Yes.
5
22%
I didn't meet them through the Hall, but they come there now. 2
9%
No.
16
70%
[[ That Yes% is much higher than Less Wrong proper, even though our gender balance
isn't much better. Shame our sample size is far too small to tell if it matters. I predict
not. ]]
Base Akrasia (1-7 scale, 1 being no akrasia, 7 being functionally paralyzed)
1
1
5%
2
0
0%
3
4
18%
4
5
23%
5
6
27%
6
5
23%
7
1
5%
Akratic Impact (Akrasia in the Hall, same scale as previous)
1
1
5%

2
9
41%
3
8
36%
4
3
14%
5
1
5%
6
0
0%
7
0
0%
[[ Self-reporting being what it is, these numbers aren't terribly reliable. But they're all
we've got for the moment and they do show an improvement. My thanks to whoever
suggested that two absolute scales were a better idea than absolute + improvement.
]]
Hedonic Impact (Hedonic improvement in the Hall, 1-5, 1 being no/negative impact, 5 being large
impact)
1
0
0%
2
0
0%
3
3
13%
4
7
30%
5
13
57%
[[ If I'd been thinking I would have measured hedons in the same manner as
akradons. Oh well, next year. ]]
Distractions (percentage)
Mean
29%
Stddev
15
Min
10%
1st quartile 18.5%
2nd quartile 30%
3rd quartile 35%
Max
70%
[[ I am not sure if these numbers are low or high. I would have to compare them to
distractibility outside the Hall, but that is much harder to notice and track unless you
are explicitly looking for it. ]]
Distraction Cause
People talking or otherwise drawing attention in the Hall during the pomo 0
0%
Digital interruptions (email or IM)
4
17%
In-person interruptions (family or friends wanting attention)
7
30%
Spontaneous web browsing or other computer use.
11
48%
Other
1
4%
[[ I should have done the same checkbox/most-important thing here that I did with the
Draw and Usage questions. Unsurprisingly, spontaneous web browsing topped the list
by a large margin. ]]
Overwork (percentage)

Mean
34.7
Stddev
24.8
Min
0%
1st quartile 12.5%
2nd quartile 33%
3rd quartile 55%
Max
90%
Accomplishments
Yes
15
65%
No
8
35%
[[ Since we're here for a reason, it seemed good to ﬁnd out whether people are
succeeding at their purpose. Hence this question and the next one. ]]
Accomplishment Examples
This was a freeform question and not everyone answered it. Most answers again
involved academic work and study, including one brave soul who studied for and
passed ﬁnal exams for classes on which he'd skipped most of the lectures. I'm not
certain if I should applaud that or not. Artistic endeavors were the second most
common response, and showed up in the form of painting, manuscripts, fanﬁction,
and blog posts. One person has been using the Hall to translate HPMoR chapters, and
another wrote an open source library. And one of our users landed a new job, for
which they'd written their CV using the Hall. Congratulations!
Miscellaneous Feedback
Social Atmosphere
1
9
41%
2
10
45%
3
3
14%
4
0
0%
5
0
0%
[[ Some people have suggested that the recent uptick in sociability and silliness
during breaks would distract people. This is an attempt to measure it. More in the
personal reﬂections section. ]]
Suggestion Box
This was a freeform question, and most respondents didn't answer. The most common
response by a fair margin was better enforcement of pomodoros, either
technologically or socially. There were also multiple calls to replace tinychat.
Despite my complaining, I would be surprised if tinychat was replaced anytime soon.
Better social enforcement of pomos should be possible, though. Remember that
anyone can track the clock if they want.
Akrasia

Since we're here to ﬁght akrasia, measuring it seemed good. I copied almost the
entire Akrasia section from Yvain's survey. A couple of people noted some ambiguous
questions. I wanted to keep the data comparable to LW proper, so rather than
modifying his questions I added clariﬁed ones in between.
Akrasia
Yes
11
50%
No
11
50%
Akrasia: Current
Yes
2
9%
No
20
91%
Akrasia: Illness
Depression
3
14%
Bipolar disorder
2
10%
Schizophrenia
0
0%
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
0
0%
ADHD
0
0%
PTSD
0
0%
Autism or autism spectrum disorder 2
10%
Generalized anxiety disorder
1
5%
Social phobia
0
0%
Any personality disorder
0
0%
None
12
57%
Other
1
5%
Akrasia: Medicines 1
No
14
67%
Other 7
33%
[[ Someone pointed out that the question as originally stated didn't specify
"medications taken speciﬁcally to combat akrasia," so I repeated the question with
that clariﬁcation for both this and the supplements question. ]]
Akrasia: Medicines 1.5
No
16
80%
Other 4
20%
Akrasia: Medicines 2
1
2
25%
2
2
25%
3
3
38%
4
0
0%
5
1
13%
Akrasia: Supplements 1

No
11
55%
Other 9
45%
Akrasia: Supplements 1.5
No
14
74%
Other 5
26%
Akrasia: Supplements 2
1
0
0%
2
1
13%
3
4
50%
4
0
0%
5
3
38%
Akrasia: Therapy 1
No
10
63%
Other 6
38%
Akrasia: Therapy 2
1
1
9%
2
3
27%
3
1
9%
4
1
9%
5
5
45%
Akrasia: Meditation 1
No
9
45%
Other 11
55%
Akrasia: Meditation 2
1
2
17%
2
4
33%
3
4
33%
4
1
8%
5
1
8%
Akrasia: Elsewhat 1
No
9
50%
Other 9
50%
Akrasia: Elsewhat 2
1
3
27%
2
3
27%
3
3
27%
4
1
9%

5
1
9%
Akrasia: Communication
Yes
16
76%
No
5
24%
Silliness
Some things suggested by our users when I was putting the survey together. This is
just for fun.
Tinychat Hatred
1
4
18% (thousand burning suns)
2
1
5%
3
7
32%
4
3
14%
5
7
32% (Emperor Palpatine)
Tinychat Screams (number of)
I don't know how to correctly calculate averages or related statistics when some
numbers are written in Knuth notation, so there's not much to report here. My favorite
answer was Pi^^^42.
Stuﬃes
No
5
24%
Yes, but only one
2
10%
Yes, more than one 13
62%
Tons
1
5%
Stuﬃes on Camera
Yes
10
48%
No
11
52%
[[ For some reason lots of us have stuﬃes. ]]
And that's the end of it. My thanks to Lachouette for feedback on a draft of this post,
and to the Hall itself for keeping me on track while I was writing about it. Those who
want to join us, consider yourselves invited.
1. I'm posting this to Main, but given that our splinter tribe is a very small fragment
of Less Wrong, I'm not sure if it's appropriate to Main. If a mod wants to move it,
I won't object.  ↩
2. Someday we'll have users with bizarre half- or quarter-hour timezone oﬀsets and
this will all fall down.  ↩
3. While there's no explicit rules about discussion topics, it's probably a good idea
to observe Less Wrong's anti-politics norm. The few times I've witnessed

conﬂicts between regulars, it was when politics came up in some way.  ↩

Don't teach people how to reach the
top of a hill
When is it faster to rediscover something on your own than to learn it from someone
who already knows it?
Sometimes it's faster to re-derive a proof or algorithm than to look it up. Keith Lynch
re-invented the fast Fourier transform because he was too lazy to walk all the way to
the library to get a book on it, although that's an extreme example. But if you have a
complicated proof already laid out before you, and you are not Marc Drexler, it's
generally faster to read it than to derive a new one. Yet I found a knowledge-intensive
task where it would have been much faster to tell someone nothing at all than to tell
them how to do it.
I'm digitizing my books by chopping oﬀ their bindings and scanning them. I recently
hired someone to do the chopping, and have been teaching him how to do it. The ﬁrst
step is to chop the book into sections of about 50 pages each, separating them at the
binding. I do this by placing the opened book cover-down under a paper chopper, and
cutting it precisely where the two opened pages meet.
The "chopper" is a manual paper-cutter with a 15-inch steel blade that weights about
10 pounds and is razor-sharp. If the blade is a ﬁfth of a millimeter oﬀ its mark, it
misses the gap between the pages and makes the cutting much harder, as it must go
through paper instead of only glue. Being an entire millimeter oﬀ makes the blade
catch the page maybe half a centimeter further away from its edge, depending on
how the base of the page is angled, cutting oﬀ words and ruining the book. You can't
see where the blade touches the book while making the cut. You can look before
making the cut and position the book, but then you need one hand to operate the
blade, and the physics of a book that wishes to spring shut, fall away from the blade,
and fall onto one side, make it nearly impossible to keep the groove in the book in
place for the blade with just one hand, unless you hold it with your ﬁngers underneath
the blade, which you can do only once.
My technique is to do this:
1. Face the chopper with the blade's hinge opposite you. The chopper has a square
base. If you're facing north, the hinge is at its northeast corner; the blade will cut
along the eastern edge.
2. Slide the book, cover-down, under the blade until the blade is over the binding.
3. Lower the blade until it almost touches the book.
4. Grasp the book with 2 hands, one on each side of the blade. Lift the book in the
air to touch the blade along its entire length. (The edge of the blade where the
cut begins is lower than the other edge.)
5. Slide the book back and forth until the groove between the pages locks into
place against the blade.
6. Lower the blade until the end that starts the cut is pressed ﬁrmly against the
book, which is pressed ﬁrmly against the cutting board.
7. Press your left ﬁngers against the pages to be cut oﬀ from the book, pressing
those pages up against the blade along its entire length and keeping the groove
of the book in place along the blade. You can feel the side of the blade through
the pages, but the blade is now too low for your ﬁngers to get underneath it.

8. Stand with your head and shoulders directly above the blade. DO NOT raise the
blade while repositioning yourself.
9. Punch downward with the blade while simultaneously falling on it with all your
weight to make a cut that is too fast to grab onto the paper and pull it out of
place.
It's more complicated than that; I'm simplifying for the sake of space. But I didn't
realize any of this when I began teaching him. I told him to put the book face-up under
the blade and cut it into sections. It takes me a few seconds to make each cut. It was
only when he kept trying to do it, and it kept not working, that I realized there must be
more to it. He would try to chop a book and it wouldn't work. I'd look at the book,
ﬁgure out what went wrong, then chop another section from the same book, watching
myself, until I ﬁgured out what I was doing that could make the diﬀerence. Then I'd
tell him. He'd try again, and it still wouldn't work. After perhaps 3 hours (6 person-
hours), we worked out the sequence of steps I was doing well enough that he could
chop books.
I could ask how I learned all those steps without knowing I'd learned them--was I
conscious of them at the time, but forgot each step as soon as it was committed to my
body? Probably. And it's interesting that I was unable to extract my own knowledge
without watching someone else fail. But my point in this essay is that it took me
longer to teach him how to do it than it took me to learn how to do it on my own--and
it took 2 people instead of 1. So teaching was less than half as eﬃcient as just
handing him a book and walking away. (I'm ignoring the risk of coming back an hour
later to ﬁnd the ﬂoor strewn with severed ﬁngers; that's overly particular to this
domain.)
He kept worrying whether he was "doing it right". When I ﬁrst ﬁgured out how to use
the book chopper, I didn't know if there was one right way, or ﬁve, or none. I didn't
have anyone to compare myself to. I could see whether I'd chopped the book the way
I wanted to, but had no way to judge whether I was doing "above average", and so no
self-consciousness about how well I was doing. Whereas he would see me take a book,
slide it in, and chop it correctly, and then he would spend minutes ﬁddling with it,
bending down to look under the blade from each side, swapping left and right hands
between the two sides of the book and the blade, raising and lowering the blade, ad
nauseum, until he ﬁnally tried to cut it--and inevitably got it wrong. He was nearly
disabled by frustration and a sense of incompetence, and his actions were the
anxious, tentative movements of someone worried about "doing it wrong" rather than
the rapid movements of someone trying to ﬁnd out whether there was any way to do
it at all. We often hear the inspirational advice that believing something is possible
makes it easier to accomplish; yet I saw just the opposite here. I didn't have my self-
image on the line in my initial discovery process because I didn't know whether my
task was possible, so I felt no pressure.
The task I originally faced was to ﬁnd any path through a very large space that would
end up with a book cut where I wanted it cut. The task the two of us faced in teaching
him was to observe me chopping books, over and over, until we could ﬁnd the one
path I had discovered and forgotten. It isn't obvious which of these tasks is easier. In
"discovery", there may be many possible solutions, while in "imitation" there is only
one.
The psychological component probably applies to every search space: Availability of
experts and the belief that there is a right way to do something inhibit
experimentation; focusing on imitation prevents discovery. But what was it about the

search space for book-chopping that made experimentation simple enough, and
imitation hard enough, that imitation was harder than discovery? My guess is it was
these things:
The task is analog/continuous, concerned with movements in space, so that it
can't be speciﬁed precisely.
The task is procedural, and almost all of the teacher's knowledge about it is
"motor memory", not conscious.
The search space is low-dimensional, because except for the ﬁnal act of cutting
and the importance of keeping ﬁngers out of the path of the blade, every action
involves only the book and the paper chopper. The book and the chopper each
have one degree of freedom, and the book can be moved in space, and that is
all.
There are no diﬃcult insights, special sticking-points, or especially-valuable
insights that could be applied repeatedly (discontinuities in the search space).
There was little back-tracking in rediscovering the steps. So there are few local
maxima.
Failures are easy to analyze; the next step in the process can be discovered by
analyzing the previous failure. Also, steps 3-5, 6-7, and 8-9 are mostly
independent; e.g., you can discover steps 8-9 before having 6-7 completely
worked out. These properties allow the task to be learned incrementally.
Roughly, it's a task in a search space on which hill-climbing works well.
Contrast this to martial arts, in which the movements of two ﬁghters have a much
higher dimensionality. The fraction of all possible movement sequences that leads to a
side-kick or a hook punch is so small that few boxers ever discover the ﬁrst and few
karate students ever discover the second. Or contrast it to mathematical proofs, which
are very high-dimensional, may have key insights (discontinuities), and give little
indication of whether one is making progress. Those are domains in which instruction
is more useful.
Think about computer software that you had to read the manual for. I think ﬁrst of
Adobe Photoshop and its concept of layers and selections. Those are complex,
broadly-applicable concepts (discontinuities) that you can't easily discover by
experimentation, as clicking on things before you understand them will make
apparently random things happen. A user interface for something casual (a game, a
website) or meant for the mass-market should have an event space on which hill-
climbing works well, so that instruction is not needed.

On not getting a job as an option
This was originally a comment to VipulNaik's recent indagations about the academic
lifestyle versus the job lifestyle. Instead of calling it lifestyle he called them career
options, but I'm taking a diﬀerent emphasis here on purpose.
Due to information hazards risks, I recommend that Eﬀective Altruists who are still
wavering back and forth do not read this. Spoiler EA alert. 
I'd just like to provide a cultural diﬀerence information that I have consistently noted
between Americans and Brazilians which seems relevant here. 
To have a job and work in the US is taken as a *de facto* biological need. It is as
abnormal for an American, in my experience, to consider not working, as it is to
consider not breathing, or not eating.  It just doesn't cross people's minds. 
If anyone has insight above and beyond "Protestant ethics and the spirit of capitalism"
let me know about it, I've been waiting for the "why?" for years. 
So yeah, let me remind people that you can spend years and years not working. that
not getting a job isn't going to kill you or make you less healthy, that
ultravagabonding is possible and feasible and many do it for over six months a year,
that I have a friend who lives as the boyfriend of his sponsor's wife in a triad and
somehow never worked a day in his life (the husband of the triad pays it all, both men
are straight). That I've hosted an Argentinian who left graduate economics for two
years to randomly travel the world, ended up in Rome and passed by here in his way
back, through couchsurﬁng.  That Puneet Sahani has been well over two years
travelling the world with no money and an Indian passport now. I've also hosted a
lovely estonian gentleman who works on computers 4 months a year in London to
earn pounds, and spends eight months a year getting to know countries while learning
their culture etc... Brazil was his third country. 
Oh, and never forget the Uruguay couple I just met at a dance festival who have been
travelling as hippies around and around South America for 5 years now, and showed
no sign of owning more than 500 dollars worth of stuﬀ. 
Also in case you'd like to live in a paradise valley taking Santo Daime (a religious ritual
with DMT) about twice a week, you can do it with a salary of aproximatelly 500 dollars
per month in Vale do Gamarra, where I just spent carnival, that is what the guy who
drove us back did.  Given Brazilian or Turkish returns on investment, that would cost
you 50 000 bucks in case you refused to work within the land itself for the 500. 
 
Oh, I forgot to mention that though it certainly makes you unable to do expensive
stuﬀ, thus removing the paradox of choice and part of your existential angst from you
(uhuu less choices!), there is nearly no detraction in status from not having a job. In
fact, during these years in which I was either being an EA and directing an NGO, or
studying on my own, or doing a Masters (which, let's agree is not very time
consuming) my status has increased steadily, and many opportunities would have
been lost if I had a job that wouldn't let me move freely. Things like being invited as
Visiting Scholar to Singularity Institute, like giving a TED talk, like directing IERFH, and

like spending a month working at FHI with Bostrom, Sandberg, and the classic
Lesswrong poster Stuart Armstrong. 
So when thinking about what to do with you future my dear fellow Americans, please,
at least consider not getting a job. At least admit what everyone knows from the
bottom of their hearts, that jobs are abundant for high IQ people (specially you my
programmer lurker readers.... I know you are there...and you native English speakers, I
can see you there, unnecessarily worrying about your earning potential). 
A job is truly an instrumental goal, and your terminal goals certainly do have chains of
causation leading to them that do not contain a job for 330 days a year.  Unless you
are a workaholic who experiences ﬂow in virtue of pursuing instrumental goals. Then
please, work all day long, donate as much as you can, and may your life be
awesome! 

