
Best of LessWrong: April 2012
1. Attention control is critical for changing/increasing/altering motivation
2. Be Happier
3. How can we get more and better LW contrarians?
4. How accurate is the quantum physics sequence?
5. Crowdsourcing the availability heuristic
6. SotW: Be Speciﬁc
7. LessWrong downtime 2012-03-26, and site speed
8. Cryonics without freezers: resurrection possibilities in a Big World
9. Hofstadter's Superrationality
10. Why I Moved from AI to Neuroscience, or: Uploading Worms
11. Let's create a market for cryonics
12. Peter Singer and Tyler Cowen transcript
13. The Quick Bayes Table
14. A question about Eliezer

Attention control is critical for
changing/increasing/altering
motivation
I've just been reading Luke's "Crash Course in the Neuroscience of Human
Motivation." It is a useful text, although there are a few technical errors and a few bits
of outdated information (see [1], updated information about one particular quibble in
[2] and [3]).
There is one signiﬁcant missing piece, however, which is of critical importance for our
subject matter here on LW: the eﬀect of attention on plasticity, including the plasticity
of motivation. Since I don't see any other texts addressing it directly (certainly not
from a neuroscientiﬁc perspective), let's cover the main idea here.
Summary for impatient readers: focus of attention physically determines which
synapses in your brain get stronger, and which areas of your cortex physically grow in
size. The implications of this provide direct guidance for alteration of behaviors and
motivational patterns. This is used for this purpose extensively: for instance, many
beneﬁts of the Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy approach rely on this mechanism.
 
I - Attention and plasticity
To illustrate this properly, we need to deﬁne two terms. I'm guessing these are very
familiar to most readers here, but let's cover them brieﬂy just in case.
First thing to keep in mind is the plasticity of cortical maps. In essence, particular
functional areas of our brain can expand or shrink based on how often (and how
intensely) they are used. A small amount of this growth is physical, as new axons
grow, expanding the white matter; most of it happens by repurposing any less-used
circuitry in the vicinity of the active area. For example, our sense of sight is processed
by our visual cortex, which turns signals from our eyes into lines, shapes, colors and
movement. In blind people, however, this part of the brain becomes invaded by other
senses, and begins to process sensations like touch and hearing, such that they
become signiﬁcantly more sensitive than in sighted people. Similarly, in deaf people,
auditory cortex (part of the brain that processes sounds) becomes adapted to process
visual information and gather language clues by sight.
Second concept we'll need is somatosensory cortex (SSC for short). This is an area of
the (vertebrate) brain where most of the incoming touch and positional
(proprioceptive) sensations from the body converge. There is a map-like quality to this
part of our brain, as every body part links to a particular bit of the SSC surface (which
can be illustrated with silly-looking things, such as the sensory homunculus). More
touch-sensitive areas of the body have larger corresponding areas within the SSC.
With these two in mind, let's consider one actual experiment [4]. Scientists measured
and mapped the area of an owl monkey's SSC which became activated when one of
his ﬁngertips was touched. The monkey was then trained to hold that ﬁnger on a
tactile stimulator - a moving wheel that stimulates touch receptors. The monkey had
to pay attention to the stimulus, and was rewarded for letting go upon detecting

certain changes in spinning frequency. After a few weeks of training, the area was
measured again.
As you probably expected, the area had grown larger. The touch-processing neurons
grew out, co-opting surrounding circuitry in order to achieve better and faster
processing of the stimulus that produced the reward. Which is, so far, just another way
of showing plasticity of cortical maps.
But then, there is something else. The SSC area expanded only when the monkey had
to pay attention to the sensation of touch in order to receive the reward. If a monkey
was trained to keep a hand on the wheel that moved just the same, but he did not
have to pay attention to it... the cortical map remained the same size. This ﬁnding has
since been replicated in humans, many times (for instance [5, 6]).
Take a moment to consider what this means.
A man is sitting in his living room, in front of a chessboard. Classical music plays in the
background. The man is focused, thinking about the next move, about his chess
strategy, and about the future possibilities of the game. His neural networks are
optimizing, making him a better chess player.
A man is sitting in his living room, in front of a chessboard. Classical music plays in the
background. The man is focused, thinking about the music he hears, listening to the
chords and anticipating the sounds still to come. His neural networks are optimizing,
making him better at understanding music and hearing subtleties within a melody.
A man is sitting in his living room, in front of a chessboard. Classical music plays in the
background. The man is focused, gritting his teeth as another ﬂash of pain comes
from his bad back. His neural networks are optimizing, making the pain more intense,
easier to feel, harder to ignore.
 
II - Practical implications: making and breaking habits, eﬃcacy of CBT
Habitual learned behaviors are often illustrated with the example of driving. When we
are learning to drive, we have to pay attention to everything: when to push the
pedals, when to signal, where to hold our hands... A few years later, these behaviors
become so automatic, we hardly pay attention at all. Indeed, most of us can drive for
hours while carrying on conversations or listening to audiobooks. We are completely
unaware, as our own body keeps pushing pedals, signaling turns, and changing gears.
We can therefore say that driving behaviors, through practice and attention,
eventually become automatic - which is, most of the time, a good thing. But so do
many other things, including some destructive ones we might want to get rid of. Let's
take a simple one: nail biting. You are reading, or watching a movie, or thinking, or
driving... when you suddenly notice some minor pain, and realize that you have
chewed your nail into a ragged stump. Ouch!
You catch yourself biting, you stop. Five minutes later, you catch yourself biting again.
You stop again. Repeat ad inﬁnitum, or ad nauseam, whichever comes ﬁrst.
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy has a highly successful approach for breaking habits,
which requires only a very subtle alteration to this process. You notice that you are
biting your nails. You immediately focus your attention on what you are doing, and

you stop doing it. No rage, no blaming yourself, no negative emotions. You just stop,
and you focus all the attention you can on the act of stopping. You move your arm
down, focusing your attention on the act of movement, on the feeling of your arm
going down, away from your mouth. That's it. You can go back to whatever you were
doing.
Five minutes later, you notice yourself biting your nails again. You calmly repeat the
procedure again.
By doing this, you are training yourself to perform a new behavior - the "stop and put
the hand down" behavior - which is itself triggered by the nail-biting behavior. As you
go along, you will get better and better at noticing that you have started to bite your
nails. You will also get better and better at stopping and putting your hand down. After
a while, this will become semi-automatic; you'll notice that your hand went to your
mouth, a nail touched your tooth, and the hand went back down before you could do
anything. Don't stop training: focus your attention on the "stop and drop" part of the
action.
After a while, the nail-biting simply goes away. Of course, the more complex and more
ingrained a habit is, the more eﬀort and time will be needed to break it. But for most
people, even strong habits can be relatively quickly weakened, or redirected into less
destructive behaviors.
It's probably obvious that habits can be created in this way as well. We don't become
better at things we do - we become better at things we pay attention to while we're
doing them. If you want to make exercise a habit, your eﬀorts will be much more
eﬀective if you focus your attention on your exercise technique, rather than
repeatedly thinking how painful and tiring the whole process is.
There is also a direct implication for training in any complex skill. Start with the well-
known learning curve eﬀect: we gain a lot of skill relatively quickly, and then
improvements slow down incrementally as we approach our maximum potential skill
level. It is relatively easy to go from a poor to a mediocre tennis player; it is much,
much harder to go from mediocre to good, and even harder to go from good to
excellent.
Complex skills have many diﬀerent aspects, which we usually attempt to train
simultaneously. We can become very good at some, while staying poor at others. The
optimal approach would be to focus most of our attention on those aspects where our
abilities are weakest, since smaller investments of time and eﬀort will lead to larger
improvements in skill.
To keep with the tennis metaphor, one could become very good at controlling the ball
direction and spin, while still having a poor awareness of the opponent's position.
Simply playing more will improve both aspects further, but our hypothetical player
should optimally try to focus her attention on opponent awareness [7].
Finally, there is another implication which I'll leave as an exercise for the readers.
Mindfulness meditation, which essentially boils down to training control of attention,
has been shown to exert a positive eﬀect on many, many diﬀerent things (lowering
depression, anxiety and stress, as well as improving productivity [8, 9, 10]). In the
light of the previous text, one obvious reason why better control over attention can
produce all these beneﬁcial eﬀects should immediately come to mind.
 

 
__________________________________________________
References
[1] I have several quibbles, but let's stick to one (to prevent this note from becoming
longer than the above text). Luke presents a view of dopamine reward system which is
stuck in the early 2000's - ages ago by the pace of neuroscientiﬁc research.
Dopamine actually has a very, very complex eﬀect on motivation, and is able to
strengthen or weaken single synaptic connections based on timing of the signal
relative to the signals from the sensory systems. Endocannabinoid neurotransmission
(i.e. signaling through chemicals that stimulate the same receptors that are aﬀected
by active ingredients in marijuana) is being shown as more and more important in this
system as well, and the relative timing of the two signals appears critical.
The complexity of the eﬀects increases by several orders of magnitude when networks
are concerned. Consider this: a planning-related network in the prefrontal cortex can
inﬂuence the motivation-generating networks in the striatum. A stimulus from the
outside is perceived by the sensory networks and transmitted to the dopamine
system, to the prefrontal cortex, and to the striatum. The same dopamine signal can,
depending on exact timing of action potential bursts, strengthen synapses in the
striatum, while weakening synapses in the prefrontal cortex. The result? The link
between the stimulus and the actual motivation can increase or decrease, depending
on exact connectivity between networks, on the relative sensitivity and on the exact
topology of the meta-network in question.
See the following two references for a broad overview of the subject area.
[2] Calabresi P, Picconi B, Tozzi A, Di Filippo M. "Dopamine-mediated regulation of
corticostriatal synaptic plasticity" Trends Neurosci. 2007 30(5):211-9.
[3] Wickens JR. "Synaptic plasticity in the basal ganglia" Behav Brain Res. 2009
199(1):119-28.
[4] Recanzone GH, Merzenich MM, Jenkins WM, Grajski KA, Dinse HR. "Topographic
reorganization of the hand representation in cortical area 3b of owl monkeys trained in
a frequency-discrimination task" J Neurophysiol. 1992 67(5), 1031-56.
[5] Heron J, Roach NW, Whitaker D, Hanson JV. "Attention regulates the plasticity of
multisensory timing" Eur J Neurosci. 2010 31(10), 1755-62.
[6] Stefan K, Wycislo M, Classen J. "Modulation of associative human motor cortical
plasticity by attention" J Neurophysiol. 2004 92(1), 66-72.
[7] I'm not ﬁnding good papers directed exactly on this point, so I'll just throw this out
as a personal opinion (although I'll say it appears well supported by indirect research).
We all like to appear competent and skillful, especially in those areas where we have
invested a lot of time and eﬀort. This can lead to a bias where we focus on using those
aspects of complex skills we are best at, and training those aspects most intensely. In
other words, a tendency appears to exist to do exactly the opposite of what we should
be doing. (If anyone has encountered a name for this bias, or has references to
suggest, I would be very grateful to hear from you.)

[8] Brown KW, Ryan RM. "The beneﬁts of being present: mindfulness and its role in
psychological well-being" J Pers Soc Psychol. 2003 84(4):822-48.
[9] Davidson RJ, Kabat-Zinn J, Schumacher J, Rosenkranz M, Muller D, Santorelli SF,
Urbanowski F, Harrington A, Bonus K, Sheridan JF. "Alterations in brain and immune
function produced by mindfulness meditation" Psychosom Med. 2003 65(4):564-70.
[10] Shao RP, Skarlicki DP. "The role of mindfulness in predicting individual
performance" Canadian J of Behavioral Sci 2009 41(4): 195-201.

Be Happier
This started as an assignment to ﬁnd out about the science of 'buying happiness'
(using money to become happier) — hence the emphasis on money-and-happiness. I
learned a great deal more than how to buy happiness, however, and the project
became somewhat more generalized. It is not meant to be comprehensive, but
perhaps it makes for a useful supplement to Luke's How to be Happy. This post
consists mostly of quoted material.
In A Nutshell
Money and Happiness
Spend on others, especially people you are close to. Positive feedback loop:
Prosocial spending makes you happier, and happiness makes you more likely to
spend prosocially.
Don't be stingy. It's bad for your health.
Don't think too much about money. It will impair your savoring ability. It's also
bad for your family life.
Be time-aware, but don't think of time in terms of money.
Being richer will not necessarily make you happier.
Do not live in wealthy enclaves.
Avoid conspicuous consumption.
Work Satisfaction
Coping with Stress: React pragmatically rather than emotionally.
Go for 'approach' goals instead of 'avoid' goals.
Autonomy: Make a point of prefering autonomous goals rather than
heteronomous goals (goals imposed by others).
Autonomy: Make sure you have spare discretionary time — even at ﬁnancial
cost.
Be passionate, but don't obsess.
Do work that you enjoy doing. Flow.
Set goals that are reasonably challenging and reasonably achievable.
Materialism and Purchasing
Prefer experiential purchases; avoid materialistic goals.
Keep your goals intrinsic.
Don't do 'comparison shopping.' And don't place much stock in the happiness
potential of any one positive change.
Follow the herd. "The best way to predict how much we will enjoy an experience
is to see how much someone else enjoyed it."
Interpersonal

Socialize with close others.
Associate with happy people.
Give the people around you opportunities to be generous. Ask them for favors.
Be actively kind (and occasionaly reminisce about your recent acts of kindness).
Stretching Happiness (ﬁghting hedonic adaptation)
Go for smaller, more frequent successes rather than larger ones.
Go for variety and surprise. Don't keep doing the same thing.
Savor anticipation. Delay consumption. Actively anticipate good experiences.
Divide positive experiences into smaller pleasures, if possible.
Corollary: Conclude negative experiences as soon as possible.
Make a point of avoiding experiences that make you feel bad.
Appreciation
Be grateful and count your blessings (literally). Recycle happiness by
reminiscing about good experiences.
Think of counterfactuals. ("If I didn't have this positive thing, what do I lose?")
Breathe deeply. Expand your time — by slowing down.
Stay in the present.
Optimal Happiﬁcation
Actively want to be happier. Motivation and investment matter.
Learn about the science of happiness. Internalize the lessons in this article and
in here.
Some Key Terms
Subjective Well Being (SWB) aka happiness.
Hedonic Adaptation — the phenomenon of (rapidly) diminishing positive or
negative aﬀect from any one experience or thing.
Hedonic treadmill — the phenomenon of neverending aspirations for
materialistic acquisitions that results from hedonic adaptation.
Money and Happiness
Spend on others, especially people you are close to.
Past research in our lab has repeatedly shown that people are happier when they
use ﬁnancial resources to beneﬁt others rather than themselves [Aknin, Dunn,
Sandstrom & Norton, submitted, 1,14].
... ﬁndings suggest that to reap the greatest emotional reward from spending on
someone else, one should direct their purchases to close others

These ﬁndings should not be taken to suggest that people should avoid spending
on weak social ties. Indeed, treating an acquaintance from yoga to a coﬀee after
class might help to build a new strong tie. Thus, spending money on a weak social
tie might help facilitate the development of new strong ties in the longer term.
... research on reciprocal altruism and the evolution of cooperation demonstrates
that people ultimately beneﬁt from behaving generously and cooperatively toward
individuals with whom they are likely to interact in the future
The current results [...] shed novel insight into translating spending choices into
happiness: the next time you ﬁnd a few spare dollars in your pocket, you will be
happiest if you treat your best friend.
(Aknin, Sandstrom, Dunn, & Norton, 2011b)
This research also supports the broaden-and-build theory of positive emotions by
demonstrating that higher levels of happiness may expand an individual's mindset
to include thoughts of others.
(Ahuvia, 2002)
... prosocial spending may be particularly promising route to prosocial behavior
because it has been shown to increase happiness immediately after spending
(Dunn et al. 2008, 2010) and later upon reﬂection, as demonstrated here.
... how money is spent may matter more than how much money is spent. That is,
participants who recalled spending on others felt happier than those who spent
money on themselves, and the beneﬁts of prosocial spending were the same
regardless of whether they spent $100 or just $20. Recent work suggests that
prosocial behavior leads to emotional gains by providing opportunities for positive
social contact (Aknin et al. 2011b); therefore, prosocial spending should promote
happiness if the spending opportunity fosters positive relations with others, which
may be largely independent of the speciﬁc amount of money spent. (Aknin, Dunn,
& Norton, 2011a)
... participants assigned to spend a small windfall on someone else by purchasing
a gift or making a donation to charity (prosocial spending) were signiﬁcantly
happier at the end of the day than participants assigned to spend the same size
windfall by paying for a bill, expense, or gift for themselves (personal spending)
(Aknin, Dunn, & Norton, 2011a)
Positive feedback loop:
Taken together, our results show that
(a) recalling a past prosocial spending experience leads to higher levels of
happiness,
(b) higher levels of happiness increase the likelihood of engaging in prosocial
spending, and
(c) recalling a past experience of prosocial spending increases the likelihood of
spending a new windfall on others to the extent that happiness levels are elevated
in the interim. This suggests that spending money on others may be self-
reinforcing as long as this prosocial experience provides happiness.
(Aknin, Dunn, & Norton, 2011a)

Being generous will make you happier.
experiments within two very diﬀerent countries (Canada and Uganda) [...] show
that spending money on others has a consistent, causal impact on happiness.
In contrast to traditional economic thought—which places self-interest as the
guiding principle of human motivation—our ﬁndings suggest that the reward
experienced from helping others may be deeply ingrained in human nature,
emerging in diverse cultural and economic contexts.
[In both] Canada and Uganda — [which] diﬀer dramatically in national-level
income and donation frequency, we ﬁnd that individuals report signiﬁcantly
greater well-being after reﬂecting on a time when they spent money on others
rather than themselves. This eﬀect emerged consistently across these two
cultures, even though the speciﬁc prosocial spending experiences participants
described diﬀered considerably. Thus, although prosocial spending diﬀers in both
frequency (Study 1) and form (Study 2) in poor versus wealthy countries, its
emotional consequences are remarkably consistent.
(Aknin et al., 2010)
we found that spending more of one's income on others predicted greater
happiness both cross-sectionally (in a nationally representative survey study) and
longitudinally (in a ﬁeld study of windfall spending). Finally, participants who were
randomly assigned to spend money on others experienced greater happiness than
those assigned to spend money on themselves.
(Dunn, Aknin, & Norton, 2008)
...prosocial spending is consistently associated with greater happiness.
The robustness of this mechanism is supported by our ﬁnding that people seem to
experience emotional beneﬁts from sharing their ﬁnancial resources with others
not only in countries where such resources are plentiful, but also in impoverished
countries where scarcity might seem to limit the possibilities to reap the gains
from giving to others.
(Aknin et al., 2010)
Don't be Stingy.
Aside from the positive eﬀect of generosity on your own happiness, stinginess makes
you less healthy; it is easier to be happy when you are healthy.
The present research suggests that stingy economic behavior can produce a
feeling of shame, which in turn drives secretion of the stress hormone cortisol.
... the present research provides support for Social Self-Preservation Theory, which
posits that acute threats to the 'social self' induce shame and lead to increased
cortisol, as part of a coordinated response to social threats (Dickerson,
Gruenewald, & Kemeny, 2004a).
Our ﬁndings provide initial, suggestive evidence that shame and cortisol represent
plausible emotional and biological pathways that might link everyday decisions

about whether to help others with downstream consequences for one's own
health.
... stingy economic behavior predicts cortisol secretion only to the extent that
stinginess provokes shame.
(Dunn et al., 2010)
Caveat: hedonic adaptation moderates the deleterious eﬀect of bad health on well-
being, but not entirely — and negative experiences are more powerful than positive
experiences:
"To sum up almost two decades of research, bad is stronger than good."
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)
(More on negative experiences farther down in 'STRETCHING HAPPINESS'.)
Think about time, but don't think of time in terms of money ("An hour of my
time is worth...").
... thinking about time in terms of money can inﬂuence how people experience
pleasurable events by instigating greater impatience during unpaid time.
In three separate experiments we have demonstrated that bringing individuals'
eﬀective hourly wage to their attention impairs the ability to derive happiness
from pleasurable experiences.
One possible explanation is that impatience discourages savoring. Savoring is a
form of emotional regulation which augments the happiness individuals derive
from experiences (e.g. Bryant et al., 2005; Quoidbach, 2009; Tugade &
Fredrickson, 2007).
... recent ethnographic research [...] found that people who are paid by the hour
narrowly evaluate their time use in terms of its economic returns. As a
consequence, they tend to discount the worth of activities with non-economic
beneﬁts (Evans et al., 2004).
... the present ﬁndings suggest that thinking about time in terms of money is
poised to aﬀect our ability to smell the proverbial roses.
(DeVoe & House, 2012)
... there is a bi-directional relationship between the scarcity of time and its value:
not only does having little time make it feel more valuable, but when time is more
valuable, it is perceived as more scarce (DeVoe & Pfeﬀer, 2010).
(Aaker et al., 2010)
In an word priming experiment done in a cafe:
Pair-wise comparisons showed that individuals primed with time spent more of
their time at the café socializing than those primed with money. Further,
individuals primed with time spent less of their time working than those primed
with money
Participants primed with money worked more than those in the control condition
and participants primed with time worked less than those in the control condition

... participants primed with time were happier than those primed with money. [...]
Participants primed with time were also happier than those in the control condition
[and] the happiness levels of those primed with money and those in the control
condition did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly,
These results suggest that increasing the relative salience of time (vs. money) can
increase happiness by leading people to behave in more connecting ways [and]
can nudge someone to spend that extra hour at home rather than at the oﬃce,
there ﬁnding greater happiness.
Focusing on money motivates one to work more, which is useful to know when
struggling to put in that extra hour of work to meet a looming deadline. However,
passing the hours working (although productive) does not translate into greater
happiness. Spending time with loved ones does, and a shift in attention toward
time proves an eﬀective means to motivate this social connection.
... the relevant question may be not how much money people have, but rather
how much attention people put on money.
Despite the belief that money is the resource most central to Americans' pursuit
of happiness, increased happiness requires a shift in attention toward time.
(Mogilner, 2010)
Being richer will not necessarily make you happier.
The belief that high income is associated with good mood is widespread but
mostly illusory. People with above-average income are relatively satisﬁed with
their lives but are barely happier than others in moment-to-moment experience,
tend to be more tense, and do not spend more time in particularly enjoyable
activities. Moreover, the eﬀect of income on life satisfaction seems to be
transient. We argue that people exaggerate the contribution of income to
happiness because they focus, in part, on conventional achievements when
evaluating their life or the lives of others.
The latter ﬁnding might help explain why income is more highly correlated with
general life satisfaction than with experienced happiness, as tension and stress
may accompany goal attainment, which in turn contributes to judgments of life
satisfaction more than it does to experienced happiness.
Despite the weak relation between income and global life satisfaction or
experienced happiness, many people are highly motivated to increase their
income. In some cases, this focusing illusion may lead to a misallocation of time,
from accepting lengthy commutes (which are among the worst moments of the
day) to sacriﬁcing time spent socializing (which are among the best moments of
the day) (28, 29). An emphasis on the role of attention helps to explain both why
many people seek high income—because their predictions exaggerate the
increase in happiness due to the focusing illusion—and why the long- term eﬀect
of income gains become relatively small, because attention eventually shifts to
less novel aspects of daily life.
(Kahneman, 2006)
It is found that higher income aspirations reduce people's satisfaction with life. In
Switzerland and the New German Laender, the negative eﬀect of an increase in
the aspiration level on well-being is of a similar absolute magnitude as the

positive eﬀect on well-being of an equal increase in income. This suggests that
subjective well-being depends largely on the gap between income aspirations and
actual income and not on the income level as such. the higher the ratio between
aspired income and actual income, the less satisﬁed people are with their life,
ceteris paribus. This supports the notion of a relative utility concept.
(Stutzer & Frey, 2010)
Emotional well-being also rises with log income, but there is no further progress
beyond an annual income of ∼$75,000. Low income exacerbates the emotional
pain associated with such misfortunes as divorce, ill health, and being alone.
[The data suggest that] above a certain level of stable income, individuals'
emotional well-being is constrained by other factors in their temperament and life
circumstances.
(Kahneman & Deaton, 2010)
Pitfall of being wealthy: your ability to savor positive emotions and
experiences will be impaired. Don't make money your priority.
The present study provides the ﬁrst evidence that money impairs people's ability
to savor everyday positive emotions and experiences.
In a sample of working adults, wealthier individuals reported lower savoring ability.
... the negative impact of wealth on savoring undermined the positive eﬀects of
money on happiness.
... moving beyond self-report, participants exposed to a reminder of wealth spent
less time savoring a piece of chocolate and exhibited reduced enjoyment of it. The
present research supplies evidence for the previously untested notion that having
access to the best things in life may actually undercut the ability to reap
enjoyment from life's small pleasures.
In other words, one need not actually visit the pyramids of Egypt or spend a week
in the legendary spas of Banﬀ—simply knowing that these peak experiences are
readily available may increase the tendency to take the small pleasures of daily
life for granted.
... having access to the best things in life may actually undermine the ability to
reap enjoyment from life's small pleasures.
... our research demonstrates that a simple reminder of wealth produces the same
deleterious eﬀects as actual wealth, suggesting that perceived access to
pleasurable experiences may be suﬃcient to impair everyday savoring.
(Quoidbach et al., 2010)
This perspective is consistent with the intriguing theoretical notion that hedonic
adaptation may occur not only in response to past experiences, but also in
response to anticipated future experiences (Frederick & Loewenstein, 1999).
Our studies provide a novel contribution by demonstrating that the emotional
beneﬁts that money gives with one hand (i.e., access to pleasurable experiences),

it takes away with the other by undercutting the ability to relish the small delights
of daily living.
... experimentally exposing participants to a reminder of wealth produced the
same deleterious eﬀect on savoring as did actual individual diﬀerences in wealth.
(Quoidbach et al., 2010)
Across nations, placing a higher importance on money is associated with lower
well-being (Kirkcaldy, Furnham, & Martin, 1998).
(Diener & Seligman, 2004)
Financial aspirations are bad for family life (and the quality of interpersonal
relationships is a strong predictor of happiness).
The negative consequences [of ﬁnancial aspirations] were particularly severe for
the domain of family life; the stronger the goal for ﬁnancial success, the lower the
satisfaction with family life, regardless of household income.
(Nickerson et al., 2003)
Don't live 'high'.
Not only materialism, but wealth itself has been found in a few studies to produce
negative eﬀects. Hagerty (2000) found that when personal income was
statistically controlled, individuals living in higher-income areas in the United
States were lower in happiness than people living in lower-income areas. (Diener
& Seligman, 2004)
This suggests that wealthy individuals are fortunate if they live in middle-class
areas rather than in wealthy enclaves.
The negative eﬀects of wealthy communities might partly be explained by their
higher materialism (Stutzer, in press).
(Diener & Seligman, 2004)
(Perhaps the more important point here is that you must surround yourself with low-
materialism people, which means surrounding yourself with happy people, since
materialism correlates negatively with happiness. A caveat to the advice of living in
middle class areas if wealthy: the presence of a wealthy neighbor can make people
more materialistic; it makes them aspire for more. A wealthy person can make his less
wealthy neighbors less happy. See below.)
Avoid conspicuous consumption.
The 'relative income hypothesis' was formulated and econometrically tested by
James Duesenberry (1949), who posited an asymmetric structure of externalities.
People look upwards when making comparisons. Aspirations thus tend to be above
the level already reached. Wealthier people impose a negative external eﬀect on
poorer people, but not vice versa. Fred Hirsch (1976), in his book Social Limits to
Growth, emphasised the role of relative social status by calling attention to
'positional goods' which, by deﬁnition, cannot be augmented, because they rely

solely on not being available to others. This theme was taken up by Robert Frank
(1985, 1999), who argued that the production of positional goods in the form of
luxuries, such as exceedingly expensive watches or yachts, is a waste of
productive resources, as overall happiness is thereby decreased rather than
increased.
(Frey & Stutzer, 2002)
(This relates to the recommendation to associate with happy people — farther down.)
More Recommendations
WORK SATISFACTION
Coping with Stress: React pragmatically rather than emotionally.
Coping can be divided into two broad engagements - either to trigger the
individual to approach the problem or to regulate the emotional reactions arising
from the challenge at hand (Andersson & Willebrand 2003). The literature typically
diﬀerentiates two broad strategies of coping (for a review, see Lazarus & Folkman
1984). First, problem-based coping refers to a cognitively-based response
behaviour that includes eﬀorts to alleviate stressful circumstances. This coping
strategy includes deﬁning the problem, generating alternative solutions,
determining the costs and beneﬁts of such solutions, and actions taken to solve
the problem. Second, emotion-based coping involves behavioural responses to
regulate the aﬀective consequences of stressful events, which may include
avoidance, minimisation and distancing oneself from the problem (Lazarus &
Folkman 1984).
It seems that problem-based coping strategies are more instrumental than
emotion-based ones for attaining successful entrepreneurial outcomes. This
implies that entrepreneurs who are more inclined toward emotion-based coping
could be trained to employ more problem-based coping, since coping can be
learned just like any other competence.
(Drnovšek et al., 2010)
Leaders and Entrepreneurs: Don't take on too many business partners. (See
also AUTONOMY below)
... entrepreneurs who had lower perceived role centrality and were part of a larger
founding team were more inclined to use emotion-based coping than those who
started their venture in smaller teams. We believe these insights can help in
training entrepreneurs in the development of eﬀective coping strategies.
Individuals with perceived high centrality of their entrepreneurial role are more
likely to eﬀectively engage in coping to optimise their venture"s performance and
their own psychological well being.
(Drnovšek et al., 2010)

Prefer the 'approach' path instead of the 'avoid' path.
It is good for your well-being to work towards achieving something, rather than
preventing something from happening.
[One] concern is whether one's goal activities are characterized by approach or
avoidance motivational systems. Elliot & Sheldon (1997), for example, classiﬁed
goals as approach or avoidance and then examined the eﬀects of goal progress
over a short-term period. Pursuit of avoidance goals was associated with both
poorer goal progress and with lower well-being. Elliot et al (1997) similarly showed
that people whose personal goals contained a higher proportion of avoidance had
lower SWB [Subjective Well Being]. They also demonstrated the association
between neuroticism and avoidance goals, but showed that the impact of
avoidance regulation was evident even when controlling for neuroticism. Carver &
Scheier (1999) also presented research linking approach goals (positively) and
avoidance goals (negatively) to well-being outcomes.
(Ryan & Deci, 2001)
AUTONOMY: Make a point of prefering autonomous goals rather than
heteronomous goals (goals imposed/expected by others).
Another actively researched issue concerns how autonomous one is in pursuing
goals. SDT in particular has taken a strong stand on this by proposing that only
self-endorsed goals will enhance well-being, so pursuit of heteronomous goals,
even when done eﬃcaciously, will not. The relative autonomy of personal goals
has, accordingly, been shown repeatedly to be predictive of well-being outcomes
controlling for goal eﬃcacy at both between-person and within-person levels of
analysis (Ryan & Deci 2000). Interestingly this pattern of ﬁndings has been
supported in cross-cultural research, suggesting that the relative autonomy of
one's pursuits matters whether one is collectivistic or individualistic, male or
female (e.g. V Chirkov & RM Ryan 2001; Hayamizu 1997, Vallerand 1997).
Sheldon & Elliot (1999) developed a self-concordance model of how autonomy
relates to well-being. Self-concordant goals are those that fulﬁll basic needs and
are aligned with one's true self. These goals are well-internalized and therefore
autonomous, and they emanate from intrinsic or identiﬁed motivations. Goals that
are not self-concordant encompass external or introjected motivation, and are ei-
ther unrelated or indirectly related to need fulﬁllment. Sheldon & Elliot found that,
although goal attainment in itself was associated with greater well-being, this
eﬀect was signiﬁcantly weaker when the attained goals were not self-concordant.
People who attained more self-concordant goals had more need-satisfying experi-
ences, and this greater need satisfaction was predictive of greater SWB. Similarly,
Sheldon & Kasser (1998) studied progress toward goals in a longitudinal design,
ﬁnding that goal progress was associated with enhanced SWB and lower symp-
toms of depression. However, the impact of goal progress was again moderated
by goal concordance. Goals that were poorly integrated to the self, whose focus
was not related to basic psychological needs, conveyed less SWB beneﬁts, even
when achieved.
(Ryan & Deci, 2001)
... freely chosen activities increase happiness, while obligatory activities lower it
(Csikszentmihalyi & Hunter, 2003).

(Aaker et al., 2010)
... we ﬁnd additional evidence that entrepreneurs also derive utility from things
other than ﬁnancial success. In particular, the achievement of independence and
creativity is highly correlated with start-up satisfaction.
... our results indicate that forcing people into situations when they cannot choose
among alternatives is likely to result in signiﬁcant utility losses, independent of
other factors.
(Block & Koellinger, 2009)
AUTONOMY: Make sure you have spare discretionary time — even at
ﬁnancial cost.
having spare time and perceiving control over how to spend that time (i.e.
discretionary time) has been shown to have a strong and consistent eﬀect on life
satisfaction and happiness, even controlling for the actual amount of free time one
has (Eriksson, Rice, & Goodin, 2007; Goodin, Rice, Parpo, & Eriksson, 2008).
Therefore, increase your discretionary time, even if it requires monetary
resources. And if you can't aﬀord to, focus on the present moment, breathe more
slowly, and spend the little time that you have in meaningful ways.
(Aaker et al., 2010)
Be passionate, but don't obsess. "Passion Does Make a Diﬀerence to
People's Well-Being" (Philippe, Vallerand, & Lavigne, 2009)
Key terms: hedonic well-being; eudaimonic well-being
Recent research has begun to distinguish two aspects of subjective well-being.
Emotional [hedonic] well-being refers to the emotional quality of an individual's
everyday experience—the frequency and intensity of ex- periences of joy, stress,
sadness, anger, and aﬀection that make one's life pleasant or unpleasant. Life
evaluation [eudaimonic well-being] refers to the thoughts that people have about
their life when they think about it.
(Kahneman & Deaton, 2010)
The results of two studies provided support for the idea that being harmoniously
passionate for an activity contributes signiﬁcantly to both hedonic and eudaimonic
well-being, while being obsessively passionate or not being passionate for any
activity does not contribute to well-being at all.
Indeed, merely engaging in a given activity without passion (i.e. being non-
passionate) led to the lowest scores on both hedonic and eudaimonic well-being in
Study 1 and to the highest decreases in vitality in Study 2 (although no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences were found between non-passionate and obsessively passionate
people in these studies).
harmoniously passionate people scored signiﬁcantly higher than obsessively
passionate and non-passionate people on hedonic and eudaimonic well-being
(Study 1).

only harmoniously passionate people showed a signiﬁcant increase in vitality over
a 1-year period, while obsessively passionate participants showed a slight
decrease and non- passionate participants an even larger decrease (Study 2).
only harmonious passion positively predicts well-being over time, while obsessive
passion is either negatively associated or unrelated to it (Rousseau & Vallerand,
2003, 2008; Vallerand et al., 2008, Study 2; Vallerand et al., 2007, Studies 1 and
2).
it would appear that an obsessively passionate or non-passionate engagement
does not contribute to well-being, and may even have a cost, as shown by the
decreases in vitality found in Study 2 for obsessively passionate and non-
passionate people.
(Philippe et al., 2009)
Do work that you enjoy doing. Flow.
the accomplishment of goals and the ability to be lost in a task (Csikszentmihalyi
and Csikszentmihalyi 1988) seem to be correlated with happiness.
(Nicolao, Irwin, & Goodman, 2009)
Sheldon and Lyubomirsky (2007) have posited that there is much room for
improvement in one's happiness. They suggest that while the largest part of our
level of happiness is preset by our genetic endowment (around 50%), some 40 per
cent is still modiﬁable (the last 10% is due to uncontrollable circumstances) and
the best way to do this is through what they call "intentional activity
engagement".
They recommend engaging in interesting, fun activities that ﬁt one's personality
and dispositions, that can vary in content, and that are not merely engaged in as
a routine but when people feel like doing it. We agree with such a
recommendation, especially as Sheldon and Lyubomirsky's deﬁnition of intentional
activity is rather close to that of harmonious passion.
(Philippe et al., 2009)
In Kasser's view, the secret to SWB is meeting one's intrinsic needs, which means
pursuing intrinsic goals out of an intrinsic motivation. In this way, it is similar to
Csikszentmihalyi's (1999) view that happiness stems from "ﬂow" experiences,
which are also intrinsically motivated. I contend that the shift toward
individualistic cultures that accompanies economic development helps people
create life-styles that are consis- tent with their preferences and aptitudes
(Veenhoven, 1999), and in so doing pursue their intrinsic needs.
(Ahuvia, 2002)
Set goals that are reasonably challenging and reasonably achievable.
One issue concerns the level of challenge posed by one's goals. When life goals
are nonoptimally challenging—either too easy or too diﬃcult—positive aﬀect
[emotional well-being] is lower (Csikszentmihalyi & Csikszentmihalyi 1988). Low

expectations of success have also been associated with high negative aﬀect
(Emmons 1986),
(Ryan & Deci, 2001)
Prefer intrinsic (vs. extrinsic) goals
Deﬁnition:
Psychologists make a distinction between two important kinds of goals—intrinsic
and extrinsic. Intrinsic goals involve activities and projects that are personally
rewarding and meaningful, and that satisfy people's basic needs for competence,
relatedness, and autonomy (Kasser & Ryan, 1993, 1996; see Ryan & Deci, 2000,
for a review). By contrast, extrinsic goals involve strivings for fame, money, or
favorable outward appearances. Research suggests that positive events
generated by the fulﬁllment of intrinsic goals (e.g., making purchases for others
rather than yourself) produce more happiness than those generated by extrinsic
goals (Dunn, Aknin & Norton, 2008; see also Kasser, 2002; cf. Dunn et al., 2011).
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)
Because high aspirations undermine the beneﬁts of a positive change, are people
simply better oﬀ with few goals and lowered aspirations? Not necessarily.
Ambitious goals held before beginning a new venture motivate people to work
harder on that venture and improve their overall performance (Heath, Larrick &
Wu, 1999). Individuals would, however, be happier if they focused their monies
and eﬀorts on meaningful, intrinsic goals and abandoned extrinsic ones.
Extrinsic goals undermine well-being in several ways. First, by their very nature,
extrinsic goals do not satisfy people's basic needs directly, if at all. Instead, much
like an addiction (Koob & Le Moal, 2001), such goals lead to ever-increasing
desires for psychologically unfulﬁlling commodities (Myers, 2000). Second,
extrinsic goals appear to be incompatible with close, meaningful relationships.
Those who pursue extrinsic goals report poorer relationships (Kasser & Ryan,
2001). Indeed, even being reminded of money, as Dunn and colleagues (2011)
mention, can cause people to be less prosocial and less generous (Vohs, Mead &
Goode, 2006), as well as to be perceived as less friendly and likable by others
(Vohs, 2010).
... over-reliance on external contingencies such as becoming famous, wealthy, or
attractive may lead to fragile self-worth (Sheldon, Ryan, Deci & Kasser, 2004). For
example, a student seeking a law degree from a prestigious and pricey school
with the aim of gaining peer respect might become hopelessly depressed if not
admitted. Finally, due to limits of attention, time, and energy, extrinsic goals can
lead to the neglect of intrinsic pursuits, which are associated with higher well-
being (Vohs et al., 2006).
An entrepreneur investing in a new company with the aim of striking it rich might
neglect his true interests and hobbies to invest all his energy into his business,
and thus miss the need-satisfying personal growth, ﬂow, and joy derived from his
more authentic pursuits.
Fittingly expressing the futility and unhappiness wrapped up in pursuing extrinsic
goals, a notorious New York tabloid editor confessed that he was "part of that

strange race of people aptly described as spending their lives doing things they
detest to make money they don't want to buy things they don't need to impress
people they dislike" (Gauvreau, 1941). As Benjamin Franklin well knew, money is
best directed to goals that directly satisfy personal needs such as aﬃliation,
autonomy, and competence rather than expensive pursuits that are unfulﬁlling
and distracting in the end.
In contrast, intrinsic goals, such as building close relationships, making new self-
discoveries, and investing in the community, directly activate feelings of
satisfaction and con- tentment, which are more likely to be appreciated and less
likely to be taken for granted. Dunn and colleagues (2011) rightfully emphasize
the link between generosity and well- being, recommending that, to follow the
example of Warren Buﬀett, people spend their money on others rather them
themselves.
Intrinsic goals can also trigger "upward spirals"— for example, streams of positive
moods and prosocial behavior that gain momentum and reinforce one another as
they unfold (Lyubomirsky, King, & Diener, 2005; Norton, Dunn, Aknin &
Sandstrom, 2009; Otake, Shimai, Tanaka-Matsumi, Otsui & Fredrickson, 2006).
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)
MATERIALISM AND PURCHASING
The Hedonic Treadmill: We adapt to life changes. Many things that give
pleasure will soon cease to do so, thereby driving us to seek more, and
more...
The "pursuit of happiness" is central to the U.S. worldview, yet the very
expression also illustrates a paradox of that worldview: Perhaps when one
[naively] pursues happiness too single-mindedly, one fails to notice and take
advantage of what one already has. In other words, [naively] striving for ever
greater happiness may set one on a hedonic treadmill to nowhere. (More on this
below)
(Sheldon & Lyubomirsky, 2012)
Prefer experiential purchases; avoid materialistic goals. It is better to
collect (positive) experiences than to collect things.
(But do not keep repeating the same positive experience, lest hedonic adaptation set
in quicker. See "Stretching Happiness" farther down.)
Experiential activities are inherently more social (Caprariello & Reis, 2010; Van
Boven & Gilovich, 2003) and for this reason fulﬁll the psychological need for
relatedness (Howell & Hill, 2009).
(Howell et al., 2012)
Discretionary experiential purchases ostensibly foster more social contact than
discretionary material purchases (Millar & Thomas 2009; Van Boven, 2005), which
is a key component to happiness (Argyle, 2001).

Research has demonstrated that people are happier with experiential purchases
compared to material items.
Experiential purchases are more central to positive self-identity than material
purchases.
Further, experiential purchases may satisfy the personal needs of development
and growth more than material acquisitions (Kasser & Ryan, 1996).
(Thomas, 2010)
... we show that on average the most happiness obtained through purchasing is
likely to be obtained through experiential purchases that turn out well.
... positive social interaction is a major source of happiness; many experiential
purchases involve activities with other people, including family.
(Nicolao et al., 2009)
Materialism might lead to lower well-being because materialistic people tend to
downplay the importance of social relationships and to have a large gap between
their incomes and material aspirations (Solberg, Diener, & Robinson, 2004).
(Diener & Seligman, 2004)
Several studies have documented that a materialistic lifestyle is associated with
diminished subjective well-being.
... consistent with previous research, we found that materialism is negatively
correlated with life satisfaction (Belk 1984, 1985; Burroughs and Rindﬂeisch 2002;
Christopher et al. 2007; Ryan and Dziurawiec 2001; Wright and Larsen 1993).
... in line with previous research (Christopher and Schlenker 2004; Chris- topher et
al. 2009). High materialistic consumers experience negative emotions more
frequently than low materialistic consumers.
(Hudders & Pandelaere, 2011)
... we administered three widely used measures of a materialistic value orientation
to 92 business students in Singapore. As expected, those students who had
strongly internalized materialistic values also reported lowered self-actualization,
vitality and happiness, as well as increased anxiety, physical symptomatology,
and unhappiness. (Kasser & Ahuvia, 2002)
past research demonstrating that materialistic values are associated with
experiences of general and existential insecurity (Pyszczynski et al., 1997;
Rindﬂeisch et al., 2009).
(Howell et al., 2012)
... positive experiences not only live on in memories but also lend themselves to
even more positive reinterpretations over time as the negative aspects of them
fade
(Nicolao et al., 2009)

... when security needs are met, it may be more adaptive to broaden one's
experience and acquire new knowledge, skills, and relationships that often
accompany experiential purchases. These experiences, if they do not arouse
competing security concerns, may then provide increased SWB with
accompanying reductions in feelings of anxiety and insecurity, encouraging
further experiential purchases, and resulting in the 'upward spiral' depicted in our
model. In this way, the beneﬁts of an experiential purchasing tendency may
accrue over a lifetime and individuals may develop stable purchasing habits.
(Howell et al., 2012)
In sum, evidence suggests that when looking to spend money, the most satisfying
pursuits should involve learning new skills (e.g., mastering a new instrument or
learning a foreign language), spending time with others (e.g., taking out one's
family to dinner or having coﬀee with a friend), or doing something good for
someone else (e.g., buying Christmas decorations for an elderly neighbor or
sending a care package to a sick friend).
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)
We provide evidence that this purchase type by valence interaction is driven by
the fact that consumers adapt more slowly to experiential purchases than to
material purchases, leading to both greater happiness and greater unhappiness
for experiential purchases.
adaptation happens more quickly for material purchases than for experiential
purchases.
(Nicolao et al., 2009)
Don't engage in 'comparison shopping.' And don't place much stock in the
happiness potential of any one positive change.
Comparison shopping makes us aware of previously unimportant diﬀerences and
makes us forget the salient qualities of what we want.
Sites like [bizrate.com] oﬀer consumers the opportunity to search for everything
[...], comparing a vast range of available options within a given category. [...]
Recent research suggests that comparison shopping may sometimes come at a
cost. By altering the psychological context in which decisions are made,
comparison shopping may distract consumers from attributes of a product that
will be important for their happiness, focusing their attention instead on attributes
that distinguish the available options.
Another problem with comparison shopping is that the comparisons we make
when we are shopping are not the same comparisons we will make when we
consume what we shopped for (Hsee, Loewenstein, Blount, & Bazerman, 1999;
Hsee & Zhang, 2004).
One of the dangers of comparison shopping, then, is that the options we don't
choose typically recede into the past and are no longer used as standards for
comparison.

A similar process is likely to unfold in the real estate market. Before purchasing a
home, people typically attend scores of open houses and viewings, scrutinizing
spec sheets for information about each property's features. Through this process
of comparison shopping, the features that distinguish one home from another may
come to loom large, while their similarities fade into the background. As a result,
home buyers might over- estimate the hedonic consequences of living in a big,
beautiful house in a great location versus a more modest home, leading them to
take out a larger loan than they can truly aﬀord (potentially sowing the seeds for a
nationwide ﬁnancial crisis).
This suggests that consumers who expect a single purchase to have a lasting
impact on their happiness might make more realistic predictions if they simply
thought about a typical day in their life.
Conclusion When asked to take stock of their lives, people with more money
report being a good deal more satisﬁed [eudamonic well being]. But when asked
how happy they are at the moment, people with more money are barely diﬀerent
than those with less [hedonic well being] (Diener, Ng, Harter, & Arora, 2010). This
suggests that our money provides us with satisfaction when we think about it, but
not when we use it. That shouldn't happen. Money can buy many, if not most, if
not all of the things that make people happy, and if it doesn't, then the fault is
ours. We believe that psychologists can teach people to spend their money in
ways that will indeed increase their happiness, and we hope we've done a bit of
that here.
(Dunn et al., 2011)
When people consider the impact of any single factor on their well-being—not only
income—they are prone to exaggerate its importance. We refer to this tendency
as the focusing illusion.
(Kahneman, 2006)
'Follow the herd.' (Dunn et al., 2011)
Research suggests that the best way to predict how much we will enjoy an
experience is to see how much someone else enjoyed it. In one study, Gilbert,
Killingsworth, Eyre, and Wilson (2009) asked women to predict how much they
would enjoy a speed date with a particular man. Some of the women were shown
the man's photograph and autobiography, while others were shown only a rating
of how much a previous woman had enjoyed a speed date with the same man a
few minutes earlier. Although the vast majority of the participants expected that
those who were shown the photograph and autobiography would make more
accurate predictions than those who were shown the rating, precisely the opposite
was the case. Indeed, relative to seeing the photograph and autobiography,
seeing the rating reduced inaccuracy by about 50%. It appears that the 17th
century writer François de La Rochefoucauld was correct when he wrote: "Before
we set our hearts too much upon anything, let us ﬁrst examine how happy those
are who already possess it."
(Dunn et al., 2011)
INTERPERSONAL

Socialize — with the right people.
... the eﬀects of wealth are not large, and they are dwarfed by other inﬂuences,
such as those of personality and social relationships.
(Diener & Seligman, 2004)
... it is not only whether you spend your time with others that inﬂuences your
happiness, but also who you spend your time with. Interaction partners associated
with the greatest happiness levels include friends, family, and signiﬁcant others,
whereas bosses and co-workers tend to be associated with the least happiness
(Kahneman et al., 2004).
social leisure activities contribute more to happiness than solitary ones (Reyes-
Garcia et al., 2009).
Furthermore, people who frequently engage in social activities experience higher
levels of happiness than people who participate in social activities less often
(Lloyd & Auld, 2002), and being with others typically improves the quality of an
experience (whereas being alone makes most people sad, lonely, or both;
Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1984; Lewinsohn, Sullivan, & Grosscup, 1982).
(Aaker et al., 2010)
Compared with the less happy groups, the happiest respondents did not exercise
signiﬁcantly more, participate in religious activities signiﬁcantly more, or
experience more objectively deﬁned good events. No variable was suﬃcient for
happiness, but good social relations were necessary.
Our ﬁndings suggest that very happy people have rich and satisfying social
relationships and spend little time alone relative to average people. [...] In
contrast, unhappy people have social relationships that are signiﬁcantly worse
than average.
(Diener & Seligman, 2002)
Income and education are more closely related to life evaluation, but health, care
giving, loneliness, and smoking are relatively stronger predictors of daily
emotions.
(Kahneman & Deaton, 2010)
Associate with happy people.
... research has also shown that our relationships with weak ties, and even
strangers, can aﬀect our happiness. Using a large-scale, longitudinal dataset,
Fowler and Christakis [5] suggested that happiness spreads throughout social
networks,extending up to three degrees of separation: a person becomes happier
if their friend's friend's friend becomes happier, even if they don't know that
person.
(Aknin, Sandstrom, Dunn, & Norton, 2011b)
People who are surrounded by many happy people and those who are central in
the network are more likely to become happy in the future. Longitudinal statistical

models suggest that clusters of happiness result from the spread of happiness and
not just a tendency for people to associate with similar individuals. A friend who
lives within a mile (about 1.6 km) and who becomes happy increases the
probability that a person is happy by 25% (95% conﬁdence interval 1% to 57%).
Similar eﬀects are seen in coresident spouses (8%, 0.2% to 16%), siblings who live
within a mile (14%, 1% to 28%), and next door neighbours (34%, 7% to 70%).
Eﬀects are not seen between coworkers. The eﬀect decays with time and with
geographical separation.
(Fowler & Christakis, 2008)
Give the people around you opportunities to be generous. Ask them for
favors.
You can possibly make people around you happier by allowing them to be kind and
generous, and you want to surround yourself with happy people (see above). Aside
from making them happier, you will also improve your relationship with them via the
Benjamin Franklin eﬀect, which — unintuitively — makes people like you more if you
ask them for favors.
Be actively kind (and occasionaly reminisce about your recent acts of
kindness).
Subjective happiness was increased simply by counting one's own acts of
kindness for one week.
Happy people became more kind and grateful through the counting kindnesses
intervention.
Our results further suggest that a reciprocal relationship may exist between
kindness and happiness, as has been shown for gratitude and happiness [see
below].
(Otake et al., 2006)
STRETCHING HAPPINESS (ﬁghting hedonic adaptation)
Hedonic adaptation — deﬁnition:
The pleasure of success and the ignominy of failure abate with time. So does the
thrill of a new sports car, the pain over a failed romance, the delight over a
promotion, and the distress of a scary diagnosis. This phenomenon, known as
hedonic adaptation (HA), has drawn increasing interest from both psychologists
and economists (e.g., Diener, Lucas, & Scollon, 2006; Easterlin, 2006; Frederick &
Loewenstein, 1999; Kahneman & Thaler, 2006; Lucas, 2007a; Lyubomirsky, 2011;
Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, & Schkade, 2005; Wilson & Gilbert, 2008).
(Sheldon & Lyubomirsky, 2012)
Choose smaller, more frequent successes rather than larger ones.
Even big positive changes can get old fast, and soon stop bringing happiness.

...every one of the published studies evidences fairly rapid and apparently
complete adaptation to positive changes. The most widely-cited study is that of
Brickman and his colleagues (1978), who reported that lottery winners were no
happier up to 18 months after the news than those who had experienced no
windfall.
(Sheldon & Lyubomirsky, 2012)
Go for variety and surprise. Don't keep doing the same thing.
...variable stimuli resist adaptation more than do unchanging stimuli (see also
Wilson & Gilbert, 2008).
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)
...these ﬁndings support the notion that variety and surprise spice up life in ways
that sustain well-being (Sheldon et al., in press; Sheldon & Lyubomirsky, 2006,
2009; Wilson, Centerbar, Kermer, & Gilbert, 2005)"
(Sheldon & Lyubomirsky, 2012)
Savor the anticipation. Delay consumption. Actively anticipate good
experiences.
Research in the ﬁeld of neuroscience has shown that the part of the brain
responsible for feeling pleasure, the mesolimbic dopamine system, can be
activated when merely thinking about something pleasurable, such as drinking
one's favorite brand of beer (McClure, Li, Tomlin, Cypert, Montague, & Montague,
2004) or driving one's favorite type of sports car (Erk, Spitzer, Wunderlich, Galley,
& Walter, 2002).
... the brain sometimes enjoys anticipating a reward more than receiving the
reward (Loewenstein, 1987; Berns, McClure, Pagnoni, & Montague, 2001).
... the pleasure derived from window shopping for a dress may exceed the
pleasure from actually acquiring the dress.
(Aaker et al., 2010)
(Perhaps the above can inform the discourse on the [ir]rationality of lotteries.)
Divide positive experiences into smaller pleasures, if possible.
Dividing consumption into smaller doses and separating it out over time can
multiply [the pleasure of] "ﬁrst bites," and subsequently, the enjoyment. Savoring
a chocolate bar could be as simple as dividing it into squares and eating one piece
per day, instead of devouring it all in a single sitting. Research supports the idea
that breaks are beneﬁcial for positive experiences, such as enjoying a television
program, but detrimental for negative experiences, such as enduring a dental drill
(Nelson, Meyvis & Galak, 2009).
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)

Dividing into smaller doses also increases the amount of pleasurable anticipation. See
previous subsection.
Corollary: Conclude negative experiences as soon as possible.
Don't "think about it tomorrow." Prolongation increases the eﬀect of both negative and
positive experiences, and bad is stronger than good:
Although the same hedonic adaptation process is involved in both positive and
negative experiences, an important asymme- try exists between the two that
further complicates eﬀorts to remain happy, especially if a positive change comes
at a high ﬁnancial cost. To sum up almost two decades of research, bad is stronger
than good (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Finkenauer & Vohs, 2001; see also Taylor,
1991), or as Einstein quipped, "Put your hand on a hot stove for a minute, and it
seems like an hour. Sit with a pretty girl for an hour, and it seems like a minute."
[...] positive changes are weaker than negative changes, and that their eﬀects
also evaporate more quickly (e.g., Nezlek & Gable, 2001; Sheldon, Ryan & Reis,
1996; see also Oishi, Diener, Choi, Kim-Prieto & Choi, 2007).
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)
Make a point of avoiding experiences that make you feel bad.
Well-being is about more than just frequently feeling good—it is also about
infrequently feeling bad (Diener, Suh, Lucas & Smith, 1999).
All else being equal, the elimination of negative experiences could provide a
three- to ﬁve-fold hedonic return on investment over the creation of positive
experiences, due to positive/negative asymmetry (e.g., David, Green, Martin &
Suls, 1997; Fredrickson & Losada, 2005; Gottman, 1994).
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)
APPRECIATION
Be grateful. Count your blessings (literally). Recycle happiness. Reminisce
about good experiences.
A number of experiments have demonstrated that the regular practice of
gratitude—a practice closely related to and often indistinguishable from
appreciation and savoring—brings about signiﬁcant increases in well-being when
performed over the course of 1 to 12 consecutive weeks. For example, relative to
performing neutral activities, the intentional and eﬀortful practice of "counting
one's blessings" once a week (Emmons & McCullough, 2003; Froh, Seﬁck &
Emmons, 2008; Lyubo- mirsky, Sheldon, & Schkade, 2005) or penning
appreciation letters to individuals who have been kind and meaningful (Boehm,
Lyubomirsky, & Sheldon, in press; Lyubomirsky, Dickerhoof, Boehm, & Sheldon, in
press; Seligman, Steen, Park & Peterson, 2005) has been shown to produce
increases in happiness for as long as 6 months.
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)

Think of counterfactuals. ("If I didn't have this, what do I lose?")
Another cognitive exercise that directs attention toward existing positive changes
or events is counterfactual thinking. This strategy involves mentally subtracting a
purchased positive experience from ever having taken place, and enumerating all
the subsequent blessings that also would have disappeared (Koo, Algoe, Wilson, &
Gilbert, 2008).
(Chancellor & Lyubomirsky, 2011)
Breathe deeply. Expand your time — by slowing down.
[People feel less rushed and hurried when they] simply breathe more deeply. In
one study, subjects who were instructed to take long and slow breaths (vs. short
and quick ones) for 5 minutes not only felt there was more time available to get
things done, but also perceived their day to be longer.
(Aaker et al., 2010)
Stay in the present.
One possible beneﬁt of being present-focused is that thinking about the present
moment (vs. the future) slows down the perceived passage of time, allowing
people to feel less rushed and hurried (Rudd & Aaker, 2010).
(Aaker et al., 2010)
OPTIMAL HAPPIFICATION
Actively want to be happier. Motivation and investment matter.
First, and most important, we found that to become happier, people need both a
will and a proper way. The will can come from motivation, expectations, and
diligence. The proper way comes from performing the "right" activity, not merely
a placebo. Accordingly, we found that motivation and investment in becoming a
happier person matters. That is, expressing gratitude and optimism did not
generally increase well-being unless a person was truly cognizant of the exercises'
purpose and motivated to improve his or her happiness. Second, eﬀortful pursuit
of happiness activities was found to be important to improving and maintaining
well- being.
... happiness interventions are more than just placebos, but [...] they are most
successful when participants know about, endorse, and commit to the
intervention.
According to our model of well-being change (Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, et al., 2005;
Sheldon & Lyubomirsky, 2004), sustainable increases in happiness are possible,
but only if pursued under optimal conditions, such as when people are motivated
to perform a positive activity, when they bring to bear eﬀort and persistence, and
when the activity is a legitimately eﬃcacious one.
(Lyubomirsky et al., 2011)

Learn about the science of happiness. Internalize the recommendations in
this article and in here.
... people often hold incorrect intuitive theories about the determinants of
happiness. For instance, they overestimate the impact of speciﬁc life events on
their experienced well-being with regard to intensity, as well as with regard to
duration. (see also Comparison Shopping above)
... four major sources for systematic over- and undervaluation of choice options
that can be distinguished: (i) the underestimation of adaptation, (ii) distorted
memory of past experiences, (iii) the rationalization of decisions, and (iv) false
intuitive theories about the sources of future utility.
(Quoidbach et al., 2010)
Money is an opportunity for happiness, but it is an opportunity that people
routinely squander because the things they think will make them happy often
don't.
It is not surprising when wealthy people who know nothing about wine end up with
cellars that aren't that much better stocked than their neighbors', and it should
not be surprising when wealthy people who know nothing about happiness end up
with lives that aren't that much happier than anyone else's.
(Dunn et al., 2011)
EXTRA CONSIDERATIONS
Happiness predicts [future] income.
(Diener & Seligman, 2004)
(^But try not to think of it that way!)
... we found that with all but one speciﬁcation, initial happiness levels were
positively and signiﬁcantly correlated with future earnings. [...] An additional
ﬁnding is that the eﬀects of initial period happiness on future income and on
future happiness seem to be more consistent across all income groups than are
the eﬀects of initial period income on either future income and future happiness.
The eﬀects of initial period income seem more important for those at higher levels
of income.
The studies by psychologists that ﬁnd that happiness has positive eﬀects on
future income also ﬁnd that these eﬀects are stronger at the higher end of the
income scale. See Diener and Biswas-Diener (1999).
(Graham, Eggers & Sukhtankar, 2004)
... higher cheerfulness in the ﬁrst year of college correlated with higher income 19
years or so later, when respondents reached their late 30s; this eﬀect was
greatest for those who came from the most aﬄuent families
(Diener & Seligman, 2004)

It will be easier to stay happy when you become happier
... our ﬁndings also dovetail with those of Cohn and Fredrickson (in press) by
demonstrating that initial happiness gains can cause a happiness intervention to
become self-reinforcing.
(Aknin, Dunn, & Norton, 2011a)
Happiness Interventions Work!
Fordyce (1977, 1983) created an intervention program based on the idea that
people's subjective well-being can be increased if they learn to imitate the traits
of happy people, such as being organized, keeping busy, spending more time
socializing, developing a positive outlook, and working on a healthy personality.
Fordyce found that the program produced increases in happiness compared to a
placebo control, as ell as compared to participants in conditions receiving only
partial information. Most impressive, he found lasting eﬀects of the intervention in
follow-up evaluation 9-28 months after the study.
(Diener et al., 2009)
Recently, a number of additional eﬀective interventions on happiness have been
reported, ranging from the kindness interventions (Otake, Shimai, Tanaca-Matumi,
Otsui, & Fredrickson, 2006) and gratitude interventions (Emmons & McCulough,
2003) to variants of the writing intervention (King, 2001; Lyubomirsky, Sousa, &
Dickerhoof, 2006). Recent intervention studies are clearly promising. However,
more diverse dependent variables and measuring instruments would be desirabe,
as well as explorations of which interventions are most beneﬁcial, and why.
(Diener et al., 2009)
Extra extra: Cultural Diﬀerences
Veenhoven (1999) found that among poor countries, individualism was negatively
associated with happiness; whereas among richer countries, individualism was
positively associated with happiness. This suggests that economic growth is part
of a complex system of modernization that needs to be seen holistically.
Collectivism may exist in poorer countries because it is highly functional in that
environment, but it may give way to more individualism as societies modernize
and the needs of those societies change. Overall, individualism/collectivism stands
out as an extremely promising construct for explaining diﬀerences in national
average levels of SWB, when investigated holistically as part of the larger social
system (Cummins, 1998; Myers and Diener, 1995).
... economic development increases SWB by creating a cultural environment
where individuals make choices to maximize their happiness rather than meet
social obligations (Coleman, 1990; Galbraith, 1992; Triandis, 1989; Triandis et al.,
1990; Veenhoven, 1999; Watkins and Liu, 1996). This cultural transformation away
from obligation and toward the pursuit of happiness is part of a broader transition
away from collectivism and toward individualist cultural values and forms of social
organization.

Cross-cultural research shows that values like "enjoying life" and leading "an
exciting life" are stronger in individualist societies, whereas "social recognition,"
"preserving my public image," being "humble," and "honoring parents and elders"
are particularly strong in collectivist societies (Triandis et al., 1990, p. 1015). There
is no more reason to think that people seek social recognition with the ultimate
goal of personal happiness, than there is to think that people seek happiness with
the ultimate goal of getting others to think well of them for having such a pleasant
aﬀect.
(Ahuvia, 2002)
References
Aaker, J. L., Rudd, M., & Mogilner, C. (2010). If Money Doesn't Make You Happy,
Consider Time. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 2011.
Ahuvia, A. C. (2002). Individualism/collectivism and cultures of happiness: A
theoretical conjecture on the relationship between consumption, culture and
subjective well-being at the national level. Journal of Happiness Studies, 3(1), 23-36.
Springer.
Aknin, L. B., Dunn, E. W., & Norton, M. I. (2011a). Happiness Runs in a Circular Motion:
Evidence for a Positive Feedback Loop between Prosocial Spending and Happiness.
Journal of Happiness Studies, 13(2), 347-355. doi:10.1007/s10902-011-9267-5
Aknin, L. B., Sandstrom, G. M., Dunn, E. W., & Norton, M. I. (2011b). It's the Recipient
That Counts: Spending Money on Strong Social Ties Leads to Greater Happiness than
Spending on Weak Social Ties. (M. Perc, Ed.)PLoS ONE, 6(2), e17018.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017018
Aknin, L. B., Barrington-Leigh, C. P., Dunn, E. W., Helliwell, J. F., Biswas-Diener, R.,
Kemeza, I., Nyende, P., et al. (2010). Prosocial spending and well-being: cross-cultural
evidence for a psychological universal. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Block, J., & Koellinger, P. (2009). I Can't Get No Satisfaction—Necessity
Entrepreneurship and Procedural Utility. Kyklos, 62(2), 191-209. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
6435.2009.00431.x
Chancellor, J., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2011). Happiness and thrift: When (spending) less is
(hedonically) more. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21(2), 131.
DeVoe, S. E., & House, J. (2012). Time, money, and happiness: How does putting a
price on time aﬀect our ability to smell the roses? Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 48(2), 466-474. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2011.11.012
Diener, E., Oishi, S., Lucas, R.E. (2009). Subjective Well-Being: The science of
happiness and life satisfaction. Oxford Handbook of Positive Psychology, 187-194.
Diener, E., & Seligman, M. P. (2002). Very happy people. Psychological Science, 13(1),
81-84.
Diener, E., & Seligman, M. P. (2004). Beyond money. Psychological science in the
public interest, 5(1), 1-31.

Drnovšek, M., Örtqvist, D., & Wincent, J. (2010). The eﬀectiveness of coping strategies
used by entrepreneurs and their impact on personal well-being and venture
performance. Journal of Economics and Business, 28, 193-220.
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending Money on Others Promotes
Happiness. Science, 319(5870), 1687-1688. doi:10.1126/science.1150952
Dunn, E. W., Ashton-James, C. E., Hanson, M. D., & Aknin, L. B. (2010). On the Costs of
Self-interested Economic Behavior: How Does Stinginess Get Under the Skin? Journal
of Health Psychology, 15(4), 627-633. doi:10.1177/1359105309356366
Dunn, E. W., Gilbert, D. T., & Wilson, T. D. (2011). If money doesn"t make you happy,
then you probably aren't spending it right. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21(2),
115.
Fowler, J. H., & Christakis, N. A. (2008). The dynamic spread of happiness in a large
social network. BMJ: British medical journal, 337, a2338.
Frey, B. S., & Stutzer, A. (2002). The economics of happiness. World Economics, 3(1),
1-17.
Graham, C., Eggers, A., & Sukhtankar, S. (2004). Does happiness pay?: An exploration
based on panel data from Russia. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 55(3),
319-342. Elsevier.
Howell, R. T., Pchelin, P., & Iyer, R. (2012). The preference for experiences over
possessions: Measurement and construct validation of the Experiential Buying
Tendency Scale. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 7(1), 57-71.
Hudders, L., & Pandelaere, M. (2011). The Silver Lining of Materialism: The Impact of
Luxury Consumption on Subjective Well-Being. Journal of Happiness Studies.
doi:10.1007/s10902-011-9271-9
Kahneman, D. (2006). Would You Be Happier If You Were Richer? A Focusing Illusion.
Science, 312(5782), 1908-1910. doi:10.1126/science.1129688
Kahneman, D., & Deaton, A. (2010). High income improves evaluation of life but not
emotional well-being. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(38),
16489-16493. doi:10.1073/pnas.1011492107
Kasser, T., & Ahuvia, A. (2002). Materialistic values and well-being in business
students. European Journal of Social Psychology, 32(1), 137-146. doi:10.1002/ejsp.85
Lyubomirsky, S., Dickerhoof, R., Boehm, J. K., & Sheldon, K. M. (2011). Becoming
happier takes both a will and a proper way: An experimental longitudinal intervention
to boost well-being. Emotion, 11(2), 391.
Mogilner, C. (2010). The Pursuit of Happiness: Time, Money, and Social Connection.
Psychological Science, 21(9), 1348-1354. doi:10.1177/0956797610380696
Nickerson, C., Schwarz, N., Diener, E., & Kahneman, D. (2003). Zeroing in on the Dark
Side of the American Dream A Closer Look at the Negative Consequences of the Goal
for Financial Success. Psychological Science, 14(6), 531-536.

Nicolao, L., Irwin, J., & Goodman, J. (2009). Happiness for Sale: Do Experiential
Purchases Make Consumers Happier than Material Purchases? Journal of Consumer
Research, 36(2), 188-198. doi:10.1086/597049
Otake, K., Shimai, S., Tanaka-Matsumi, J., Otsui, K., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2006). Happy
People Become Happier through Kindness: A Counting Kindnesses Intervention.
Journal of Happiness Studies, 7(3), 361-375. doi:10.1007/s10902-005-3650-z
Philippe, F. L., Vallerand, R. J., & Lavigne, G. L. (2009). Passion does make a diﬀerence
in people's lives: A look at well-being in passionate and non-passionate individuals.
Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being, 1(1), 3-22.
Quoidbach, J., Dunn, E. W., Petrides, K. V, & Mikolajczak, M. (2010). Money Giveth,
Money Taketh Away. Psychological Science, 21(6), 759.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2001). On happiness and human potentials: A review of
research on hedonic and eudaimonic well-being. Annual Review of Psychology, 52(1),
141-166.
Sheldon, K. M., Lyubomirsky, S. (2012).The Challenge of Staying Happier: Testing the
Hedonic Adaptation Prevention Model. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
doi:10.1177/0146167212436400
Stutzer, A., & Frey, B. S. (2010). Recent advances in the economics of individual
subjective well-being. Social Research: An International Quarterly, 77(2), 679-714.
Thomas, R. L. (2010). Mediating and moderating variables between discretionary
purchases and happiness. UNLV Theses/Dissertations/Professional Papers/Capstones.
Paper 889.

How can we get more and better LW
contrarians?
I'm worried that LW doesn't have enough good contrarians and skeptics, people who
disagree with us or like to ﬁnd fault in every idea they see, but do so in a way that is
often right and can change our minds when they are. I fear that when
contrarians/skeptics join us but aren't "good enough", we tend to drive them away
instead of improving them.
For example, I know a couple of people who occasionally had interesting ideas that
were contrary to the local LW consensus, but were (or appeared to be) too conﬁdent in
their ideas, both good and bad. Both people ended up being repeatedly downvoted
and left our community a few months after they arrived. This must have happened
more often than I have noticed (partly evidenced by the large number of
comments/posts now marked as written by [deleted], sometimes with whole threads
written entirely by deleted accounts). I feel that this is a waste that we should try to
prevent (or at least think about how we might). So here are some ideas:
Try to "ﬁx" them by telling them that they are overconﬁdent and give them hints
about how to get LW to take their ideas seriously. Unfortunately, from their
perspective such advice must appear to come from someone who is themselves
overconﬁdent and wrong, so they're not likely to be very inclined to accept the
advice.
Create a separate section with diﬀerent social norms, where people are not
expected to maintain the "proper" level of conﬁdence and niceness (on pain of
being downvoted), and direct overconﬁdent newcomers to it. Perhaps through
no-holds-barred debate we can convince them that we're not as crazy and wrong
as they thought, and then give them the above-mentioned advice and move
them to the main sections.
Give newcomers some sort of honeymoon period (marked by color-coding of
their usernames or something like that), where we ignore their overconﬁdence
and associated social transgressions (or just be extra nice and tolerant towards
them), and take their ideas on their own merits. Maybe if they see us take their
ideas seriously, that will cause them to reciprocate and take us more seriously
when we point out that they may be wrong or overconﬁdent.
I guess these ideas sounded better in my head than written down, but maybe they'll
inspire other people to think of better ones. And it might help a bit just to keep this
issue in the back of one's mind and occasionally think strategically about how to
improve the person you're arguing against, instead of only trying to win the particular
argument at hand or downvoting them into leaving.
P.S., after writing most of the above, I saw  this post:
OTOH, I don't think group think is a big problem. Criticism by folks like Will
Newsome, Vladimir Slepnev and especially Wei Dai is often upvoted. (I upvote
almost every comment of Dai or Newsome if I don't forget it. Dai makes always
very good points and Newsome is often wrong but also hilariously funny or just
brilliant and right.) Of course, folks like this Dymytry guy are often downvoted, but
IMO with good reason.

To be clear, I don't think "group think" is the problem. In other words, it's not that
we're refusing to accept valid criticisms, but more like our group dynamics (and other
factors) cause there to be fewer good contrarians in our community than is optimal. Of
course what is optimal might be open to debate, but from my perspective, it can't be
right that my own criticisms are valued so highly (especially since I've been moving
closer to the SingInst "inner circle" and my critical tendencies have been decreasing).
In the spirit of making oneself redundant, I'd feel much better if my occasional voice
of dissent is just considered one amongst many.

How accurate is the quantum physics
sequence?
Prompted by Mitchell Porter, I asked on Physics StackExchange about the accuracy of
the physics in the Quantum Physics sequence:
What errors would one learn from Eliezer Yudkowsky's introduction to quantum
physics?
Eliezer Yudkowsky wrote an introduction to quantum physics from a strictly realist
standpoint. However, he has no qualiﬁcations in the subject and it is not his
specialty. Does it paint an accurate picture overall? What mistaken ideas about
QM might someone who read only this introduction come away with?
I've had some interesting answers so far, including one from a friend that seems to
point up a deﬁnite error, though AFAICT not a very consequential one: in
Conﬁgurations and Amplitude, a multiplication factor of i is used for the mirrors where
-1 is correct.
Physics StackExchange: What errors would one learn from Eliezer Yudkowsky's
introduction to quantum physics?

Crowdsourcing the availability
heuristic
There are goals which can be achieved only by personal exertion and hard work -
ﬁnishing a university degree, learning a language, mastering a martial art... But there
is also a plethora of smaller goals, where small diﬀerences in approach and resources
can make a huge diﬀerence. I'm going to examine how one particular cognitive bias
aﬀects execution of small-to-midrange goals, why this bias cannot be realistically
overcome on a personal level, and how it can be eﬀectively short-circuited simply by
involving other minds.
Do note:  the point I'm making may seem obvious; in my personal experience, and
from observation, it is one of those things that are obvious once you know the answer
(and one still needs occasional reminders). The solution to the problem is high-impact
and available to practically everyone, but remains vastly underused.
The bias in question is availability heuristic. LW has a decent deﬁnition:
The availability heuristic judges the probability of events by the ease with
which examples come to mind. Sometimes this heuristic serves us well, but the
map is not the territory; the frequency with which concepts occur in your
thoughts need not reﬂect the frequency with which they occur in reality. Undue
salience, selective reporting, even subtle features of how the human brain
stores and recalls memories can distort our perceptions about the probability of
events. Because it's easier to recall words by their ﬁrst letter, people judge
words that begin with the letter r to be more frequent than words with r as their
third letter, even though in fact, the latter is more frequent. Or selective
reporting by the media of dramatic tragedies makes them seem more frequent
than more threatening albeit mundane risks.
This topic has been talked about many times on LW, and there is a great deal of
academic research as well [1], including seminal texts many here will be familiar with
[2]. It's all interesting, but there are two critical points I want to pull up to the
forefront.
I - availability heuristic is commonly treated as a simple perceptual bias. In actuality, it
is also a choice bias - if you fail to perceive an option, you cannot choose to pursue it.
If you do pursue an option, you are likely going to focus on attaining it with cognitively
available resources, while missing much better resources that are sitting idle.
Similarly, you may waste resources (sometimes to the point of simply giving up) while
pursuing a sub-optimal but cognitively available path towards your goal - completely
oblivious to much easier roads which are actually available to you.
II - availability heuristic is not really "curable." Sure, it's good to be aware of it. But we
all have limited information about the world. Even if we objectively write down all
known relevant factors for some observation or decision, our sample is still going to
be at least somewhat biased, and certainly very narrow. Outside our direct areas of
expertise, the amount of information we can include into any decision is quite limited;
and the number of items our working memory holds while the decision is made is
limited yet further.

One obvious mitigation strategy is probably apparent: simply research your desired
goal by consulting experts (or the Googlian Oracle). How did other people achieve the
goal? What preparations did they undertake? What strategies are recommended?
Good idea, which comes with several limitations.
Much of the information out there is written by people who are unaware of the
existence of availability heuristic. The recommendations, however reﬁned, are still
usually descriptions of single strategies which happened to work optimally for the
person who wrote the article. They could work (and often will), but they may not be
the optimal solution to your particular problem set. Furthermore, as I will illustrate
soon, the most common strategies you will ﬁnd are the ones most cognitively
available to the most people; an Internet search will, in eﬀect, potentiate the
availability heuristic even further, hiding less obvious strategies even further.
But by far the most signiﬁcant limitation comes from the fact that knowledge does not
equal resources. Even if you research an optimal strategy, you may still be unaware of
the full scope of resources that are available to you. To avoid abstraction, let's take a
speciﬁc example.
Example: crowdsourcing adventure opportunities
A friend of mine has an interesting strategy for increasing the overall awesomeness of
her life. Every January 1st, she comes up with a general rule, which she then follows
until the end of the year. The rule is modiﬁed by common sense (you don't follow it if
it will get you into an extraordinarily dangerous situation, or if following it is otherwise
prohibitively expensive), but other than that, it has to be followed.
This year, the rule is "when you think or hear of something that causes you to be
afraid, go ahead and do it." She's afraid of heights, so the obvious "go skydiving" is on
the list from the start. But then, someone mentions ﬂying in an acrobatic aircraft. That
gets added to the list. I'm sure you see the general principle.
Seems a bit cheesy, at ﬁrst glance. But... within the ﬁrst four months of this year, she
went ﬂying in the aforementioned acrobatic aircraft (and a helicopter), learned how to
ski, and even rode a damn ostrich. All within four months. She went caving this past
weekend. Hang-gliding is ﬁrmly scheduled in a few months. And there are other, less
glamorous experiences as well, but it's quite a list.[3, 4]
Now, let's say I wanted to do one of those things - say, an acrobatic airplane ride.
What comes to mind? I look up places that oﬀer such rides. I would need to travel
there (and given the distances involved, get a hotel room as well). Pay the fee. Get to
spend about 15-20 minutes being ﬂown around. It's a lot of eﬀort, and the payoﬀ
doesn't seem really worth it. Hey, let's see what other people did! Google, google... a
bunch of testimonials about people having a great/awful time taking the
aforementioned touristy rides (most signiﬁcant ﬁnding: corkscrews often cause
explosive nausea). So I give up.
How did my friend do it? She talks to people about it; asks them for ideas. And soon
enough, someone says "yeah, I know a guy who owns an acrobatic plane, wanna ride
with him?" And lo and behold, a free ride of much higher quality than touristy
nonsense one pays for, plus it's very close to home.
My approach above is the cognitively available one. I'm proceeding towards the goal
in accordance with the patterns I've followed previously, when achieving similar goals.

I'm thinking about resources that are available to me, personally (my money, my time,
etc.). I end up with a suboptimal plan.
Her approach is to crowdsource: throw the desire into the world, and see what others
come up with. Many people, with many diﬀerent resources, ideas, and further links to
even more people out there.
Once I started thinking about this, I decided to test this concept. I tried throwing out
the acrobatic ride idea to my friends - and lo and behold, a friend of a friend of a
friend is going to be ﬂying in this summer. In his acrobatic aircraft. And now, when he
gets here, I'm likely to get an hour or so of riding time with him, for free. Just because
I asked.
It's a somewhat silly example, of course, but I think it illustrates the point. This friend
(of a friend)2 is a resource. I was unaware I had this resource, until I asked for it.
Finding an acrobatic aircraft owner through personal connections is a strategy that
would have never occurred to me (since my availability heuristic informs me that such
people are exceedingly rare).
Does this still seem obvious? Many articles were written about the "breakthrough"
design of the Apple headquarters - a building made to force people together, to
produce conversations between workers in diﬀerent areas, and interactions between
people who think in very diﬀerent ways. In MIT lore, legends are written about Building
20, a "magical incubator" that has produced an incredible amount of breakthrough
technologies and world-class thinkers. One of the main reasons given for this
productivity is that many disparate small groups of researchers in a wide range of
areas were thrown together in a small space - where they had to interact and talk to
each other.
In other words, there is a certain kind of "magic"... in places that force people to
simply utilize each other's cognitive resources, to seek out diﬀerent ways of thinking,
and to avoid falling into cognitively available approaches to the problems they are
trying to solve. And the point I'm trying to make is that one doesn't need to work in
Building 20 - just to intentionally maximize the utilization of their own social network
(and work on diversifying it as much as possible).
There are people who already utilize their social network to the utmost, and who
expand it strategically, adding people just to enhance the diversity of available
viewpoints. But I will take a chance, and state that most of us probably don't. And as a
result, we aren't able to recognize all of the resources available to us, to optimally use
those we do recognize, or to realize optimal strategies for approaching our goals.
Chances are that most of us could improve the strategy and execution of any given
midrange goal - simply by asking around.
_____________________________
(EDIT) Addendum: help-seeking, status, etc.
There is a bit of discussion in the comments regarding some important questions -
how and when does seeking help aﬀect status within the group, would seeking help on
a regular basis cause people to become uninterested in helping, etc. These may
become a basis for a diﬀerent text in the near future.
But these questions miss an important point here. Sure, asking for help can be a part
of the strategy I discuss above, in some cases. In most cases, however, you should not

be seeking help. The point of the article here is to simply talk about your goal and
your strategy with others. "Involving other minds" does not necessarily require them
to take an active helper role in the achievement of your goal.
In the speciﬁc example given in the text, I didn't go around saying "hey, I'm looking
for help in ﬁnding an acrobatic airplane ride." Instead, I would say something like
"Riding an acrobatic plane seems like an interesting thing; I'm trying to look into
ﬁnding an opportunity to do so in the near future." Thoughts, oﬀers and the eventual
connection grew organically from the discussions that followed. Sure, the pilot himself
is going to be doing me a favor (which I'll eventually repay), but the people who made
the connection for me were just having a conversation.
To illustrate further on an example that popped up in the comments: a CEO of a
company that always asks for help in making decisions will rapidly lose status (and
therefore become ineﬀective at his or her job). This much is true. But most eﬀective
CEOs will organize their companies so that people of varying backgrounds will have to
talk (at some point or other) about current company projects and strategies. The CEO
doesn't ask for help in making the decision: she requires that her underlings produce
ideas and overviews, which then become a basis for making optimal decisions.
_____________________________
References:
 [1] A few recent examples: Hayibor, S., Wasieleski, D.M. (2009). "Eﬀects of the use of
availability" Journal of Business Ethics 84: 151-165. Also, Klinger, D., Kudryavtsev, A.
(2010). "The availability heuristic and investors' reactions to company-speciﬁc events"
The Journal of Behavioral Finance 11 (50-65).
[2] Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. (1973) "Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency
and probability" Cognitive Psychology 5 (1): 207-233.
[3] She's blogging her progress through this year, and the whole thing is highly
recommended; for sheer hilarity as much as for some very interesting insights.
[4] One could write an excellent text on goal-setting strategies around this example.
The rule is simple and absolute ("never have any chips, cookies or other snacks
available at home" is easier to follow and will in most cases lead to a greater weight
loss than an intricate diet), and it is overarching (applies everywhere in life, not only
to some particular times and places, making lawyering around the rule much more
diﬃcult). If you are going to set rules for yourself, this is the way to do it. But since I'm
writing a loose set of texts on a completely diﬀerent topic, this footnote will be all I
have to say on that topic.
 

SotW: Be Speciﬁc
(The Exercise Prize series of posts is the Center for Applied Rationality asking for help
inventing exercises that can teach cognitive skills.  The diﬃculty is coming up with
exercises interesting enough, with a high enough hedonic return, that people actually
do them and remember them; this often involves standing up and performing actions,
or interacting with other people, not just working alone with an exercise booklet and a
pencil.  We oﬀer prizes of $50 for any suggestion we decide to test, and $500 for any
suggestion we decide to adopt.  This prize also extends to LW meetup activities and
good ideas for verifying that a skill has been acquired.  See here for details.)
Exercise Prize:  Be Speciﬁc
During YCombinator's Startup School 2011, Paul Graham and Harj Tagger did "oﬃce
hours" onstage.  One pair of entrepreneurs were doing a matchmaking (dating)
startup, and Paul and Harj were trying to ﬁgure out what their startup did, exactly - for
example, what their startup could do that the existing low-tech solution couldn't.
 (Video.)
Harj:  Low-tech like, you know, just like word of mouth, telling someone "hey, you
should like, meet up with my friend" or "we're getting drinks, why don't you come
along?" Like, what can the software do that's speciﬁcally better than that?
Entrepreneur:  I think that our software speciﬁcally is providing the better
connections for people, um...
Paul: Providing the better connections for people...?
Entrepreneur:  I mean, one way you can think about it, I don't know if this is the
right answer, but... there's a lot of things that are happening in real life that
they're trying to mimic online, maybe that's not the correct way to...  Look at it
like this: to give them an online tool to also do this, like they're already doing in
real life, maybe they could reach, uh expand their reach through the online
website.
This had been happening with most of the startups Paul and Harj were interrogating -
they just could not seem to provide a customer use-case - and I couldn't stand it any
more; which is why at this point I whispered audibly enough for a few nearby people
to hear, "Be speciﬁc!  Be speciﬁc!"
A moment later, on stage:
Paul:  Hm.  Not very speciﬁc.
I got some strange looks from the people sitting next to me.
I hope this provides some background for my guess that around half of Paul Graham's
advantage is based on years of incubator experience, and the other half is unusual
rationality skills of the sort that the Center for Modern Rationality is trying to ﬁgure
out how to teach.  Obviously this is only a very rough conjecture.  But you can see the
basis for the hope that - after a fair amount more work - we'll be able to oﬀer a 2-day

course for YCombinator entrepreneurs that eliminates 50% of the overhead from their
conversations with Paul Graham.
(Also, note how this post starts oﬀ with a speciﬁc example - an instance of the
concrete-abstract writing pattern in which you state the example ﬁrst and the
generalization afterward.  This is one of the most common bits of nonﬁction writing
advice I dispense:  "Open with the concrete example, not the abstract explanation!")
Theoretical background:
S. I. Hayakawa once gave this illustration of the "ladder of abstraction", and in
particular, the diﬀerence between going up or down:
"What is meant by the word red?"
"It's a color."
"What's a color?"
"Why, it's a quality things have."
"What's a quality?"
vs.
"What is meant by the word red?"
"Well, the next time you see some cars stopped at an intersection, look at the
traﬃc light facing them.  Also, you might go to the ﬁre department and see how
their trucks are painted."
"Red is a color" is moving up the ladder; "color" is a supercategory of red.  All things
which are red, have colors; but not all things which have colors, are red.  And
similarly, if you look at a speciﬁc ﬁretruck, that ﬁretruck is a red thing, but there are
also many other red things which are not that ﬁretruck.
What is true of one apple may not be true of another apple; suppose apple1 weighs
100 grams and is slightly green in some places, and apple2 weighs 200 grams and is
entirely dark-red.  You can say more truths about apple2, like "apple2 is dark red", then
you can say that is true of all apples.  (For more on this point see The Virtue of
Narrowness.)
Thus, it may be easier to mentally picture "a ﬁretruck" than "something red" -
"ﬁretruck" describes a narrower section of Thingspace, so you're less likely to get lost
along the way.
S. I. Hayakawa called this the ladder of abstraction.  I'm not sure if understanding the
following section will really help with the skill of Being Speciﬁc, or help anyone
construct exercises for the skill of being speciﬁc.  But a better theoretical
understanding does sometimes prove useful.  So I will now digress to explain that
abstraction isn't really a ladder, but a lattice.
Let's illustrate this using a classic example from the ﬁeld of machine learning.
 Suppose that Days have three properties:
Weather: {Sunny, Cloudy, Rainy}
Temperature: {Cool, Hot}
Timing: {Weekday, Weekend}

And suppose that we've been given some examples of Days on which it was good, or
alternatively bad, to play tennis.  For example, the Day {Sunny, Cool, Weekend} was
good for playing tennis, but the day {Rainy, Hot, Weekday} was bad for playing
tennis.  A classic task in machine learning is to induct, from a set of pre-classiﬁed
examples like these, a rule describing when it is good to play tennis.
Any proposed rule which can classify all days as good or bad is a concept, in the lingo
of machine learning.  "Sunny Days" is a concept; likewise "Sunny Cool Days", and
"Days which are either Cool or Sunny".  Each of these is a concept which classiﬁes all
12 possible days either positively or negatively - instances or non-instances of the
concept.
There are 212 possible concepts over the 12 possible Days.  Why so many?  Because -
for example - there's a concept which only includes the two Days
{Sunny+Cool+Weekday} and {Cloudy+Cool+Weekend}}, but classiﬁes all other Days
as noninstances.  This is a way of classifying all Days into instances or noninstances,
hence a possible concept.  It's not a compact concept, but it's a concept.  Each Day
can be classiﬁed either positively or negatively - one binary decision per Day - so
212 possible concepts.  (That's why induction is a diﬃcult problem in machine
learning.)
The concept "Sunny" is a superconcept of "Sunny and Cool"; it lies above it in the
lattice of abstraction, since all days which are "Sunny and Cool" are "Sunny".  "Sunny
or Hot" is a supercategory of "Sunny".  "Weekend" is neither a superconcept nor a
subconcept of "Sunny".
Concepts form a directed lattice from most general to most speciﬁc, with "all Days" at
the top (every Day classiﬁed as an instance) and "no Days" at the bottom (the
concept which classiﬁes every Day as a noninstance).
If you now go back to the problem of telling someone what "red" means, when you
say "red is a color", then, even if the listener does happen to know what "color"
means, you're still moving upward in the lattice of abstraction.  When you said "color",
you were talking about a concept that included all red things, but also many other
things that were not red.
"Our software is providing the better connections for people" - the entrepreneur who
said that might have had something speciﬁc in mind, or they might have just been
bluﬃng or succumbing to wishful thinking.  But they described it using an abstract
statement so broad that it included Facebook, or Western Union back when they were
sending telegrams.  They might - though this is somewhat optimistic - they might
have known themselves what they had in mind; they didn't think of Facebook; so they
didn't realize how many other possibilities ﬁt their words.  This is a classic
manifestation of the Illusion of Transparency, and it's why we have to keep telling
people to navigate the lattice downward.
The skill of Being Speciﬁc is the skill of understanding how to navigate the lattice of
abstraction.  You can see why this would be a key element of cognition on a par with
Bayes's Theorem or consequentialism.
And this is true in practice as well as theory.  When I'm talking to anyone outside the
local LW community, I ﬁnd that a very large amount of my conversation involves
repeatedly asking them to be more speciﬁc - and if you think that's just me being
annoying, watch Paul Graham in the video.

A closely related skill is concreteness, which has to do with nearness-to-sensory-
experience or actionability.
According to David Allen's "Getting Things Done", for your brain to stop thinking about
an unﬁnished task, you must (1) know and trust that an external system will remind
you to perform that task when it is time to perform it, and (2) have chosen the next
action taken at a suﬃciently concrete level that your brain is no longer trying to plan
it out in the background.  "Contact Luke about dispersing prize awards" is not a
suﬃciently concrete to-do; it leaves open the question of whether to phone or email,
and what exactly to say.  "Read through the comments, gather the LessWrong
usernames of everyone who made a suggestion we tried or adopted, and email the list
to Luke" is an action item I know how to perform straightforwardly, without my brain
trying to plan it in the background.  When you have a trustworthy external system to
remind you of what to do, at the time you need to do it - so that the back of your mind
isn't worrying about remembering to check the to-do list - and all to-do items have
been concretized to the point of being executable without further background
planning - then you have, in GTD parlance, "gotten to zero", a state of pure mental
blissfulness in which your brain is not worrying about anything except what you're
doing right now.
Similarly, for a statement like "Wulky Wilkinsen is a post-utopian" or "Earth gravity
pulls at 9.8 meters per second squared" to be falsiﬁable, it must be concretized -
rendered near-to-experience - to a suﬃcient degree that you can potentially see
something and say "Oh, guess the hypothesis was wrong"; you must be able to have
an experience which the concretized statement constrains, and which falsiﬁes the
theory if the experience is out-of-bounds.
Theoretically:  If you imagine the universe as a huge directed graph of causes and
eﬀects - the Great Web of Causality - then "concreteness" is being near enough in the
Web to either your sensory inputs or motor outputs that you can directly see the
prediction unfold, or directly implement the plan, without much further thought.
"Be Speciﬁc" and "Be Concrete" could easily end up being the same unit - they're
closely related - and we're happy to entertain exercises for Being Concrete, as well as
Being Speciﬁc.  Visualizing what your customer literally sees or does after navigating
to your site, would've been a good ﬁrst step toward being able to answer many of Paul
Graham's questions.
A possible success criterion:
One question that we spent a lot of time discussing at CMR, was translating our sense
of "speciﬁc enough" or "concrete enough" into a describable criterion.  (Instead of just
a wordless intuition for when something is "too abstract".)
There was an exchange in Paul Graham's oﬃce hours that went like this, while
interviewing a startup that did metrics - analyzing pageviews, roughly - and the
entrepreneur was having great trouble describing what they did that MixPanel didn't.
 It went on for a while.  It was painful to watch.
Paul:  I don't get what the diﬀerence is.  I still don't get what the diﬀerence is.
 What's the diﬀerence between you and MixPanel?

Entrepreneur:  The diﬀerence is - when you have to supplement - they're a view
company and we're a platform.  That's what it comes down to.  They're like a view,
a reporting company.  If you need something they don't have, a feature - 
Harj:  So what's an example of somewhere you'd use your thing over MixPanel?
 Can you give a use-case?
Entrepreneur:  Yeah, I mean, we had revenue on day zero. There's a good reason
for um... it's a start up, it's a series A company in the daily deals space.  One
we've signed a social game company to -
Harj:  And why do they prefer your thing?
Paul:  That wasn't what Harj was asking.
The problem (from the perspective of our present discussion) is that the Entrepreneur
did not understand that Paul and Harj were repeatedly asking him to move downward
on the ladder of abstraction.  When the Entrepreneur said "We had revenue on day
zero", he was trying to oﬀer conﬁrmation of the abstract statement "We can do things
MixPanel can't", but Paul and Harj still had no idea what his startup actually did.[1]
A quick bit of theoretical background:  There's an important diﬀerence, in the ﬁeld of
mathematical logic, between models and axioms.  An axiom is something like "All
kittens are cute", i.e. "All x: kitten(x)->cute(x)".  A model is a particular universe of
objects that includes {Obj #19834, kitten: T, cute: T, color: grey} and {Obj #19835,
kitten: F, cute: F, color: striped}, and so on.
Correspondingly, in logical inference, there's a distinction between model-
checking and deduction.  Suppose you want to know whether it's true that all positive
integers less than 5, when multiplied by 7, are less than 50.  If you prove the general
truth that all integers less than 5, times 7, are less than 35, by manipulating the
axioms of multiplication and inequality, that's deduction.  If you notice that the only
positive integers less than 5 are just {1, 2, 3, 4} and enumerate their products {7, 14,
21, 28}, which are all less than 50, that's model-checking.
My hypothesis about what it means to be "speciﬁc enough" or "concrete enough" is
that the picture painted is detailed enough to use in model-checking whatever points
are being debated.  Paul and Harj don't want to trust you when you state the abstract
generalization, "We're better than MixPanel".  They aren't even content with deducing
support for this generalization from the further generalization, "We already have
customers."  They want a picture of something you do that MixPanel doesn't, which is
detailed enough that they can model-check whether you have a competitive
advantage.
Not to mention that Paul Graham is probably thinking about a number of other
questions:
How much would I pay for this product?
Is this startup exciting enough that I would tweet about using it?
How much resources will it take to develop these features further?
Paul Graham doesn't want you to say, "$50, yes, and twenty engineer-months".  He
wants a suﬃciently speciﬁc picture of (a customer using) your product that he can
arrive at his own answers by model-checking.

If Paul Graham is reading this, he's welcome to contradict my interpretation of what
was going on in that particular session - but it did seem like a very nice concrete
illustration.
That's my guess for what often constitutes "speciﬁc enough" - though I'm not sure
that's the only thing that ever determines speciﬁc-enoughness.
[1]:  The strange part was, near the end of that session, it started to look like this
might be an interesting startup; that the Entrepreneur wasn't just bluﬃng.  Their
actual use-case was to let customers easily roll their own code to measure, e.g., the
page-viewing behavior of only customers who'd bought more than $200 worth of stuﬀ,
which allegedly MixPanel wouldn't let you do.  Which would've been a perfectly good
answer if the Entrepreneur had given it at the start of the session, instead of the
whole session being about Paul and Harj trying to get at that information.
Five-second-level skill:
The 5SL skill for this problem requires:
Trigger:  Recognizing when your words or thoughts are too abstract.
Action:  Moving downward in the abstraction lattice, or moving nearer to sense
input or motor output; being able to render your thoughts more speciﬁc or more
concrete.
Both of these are targetable for exercises.
Pain points & Pluses:
• You want Paul Graham to believe your startup is better than MixPanel.  So you say,
"My startup is better than MixPanel" - just produce the pure abstract conclusion you
want Paul Graham to arrive at.  You keep trying to convince Paul Graham of this
statement, saying that you have customers or that you have venture capital, but
never actually move downward to the level where Paul Graham could arrive at this
conclusion by model-checking.
• You want to describe what your software does, so you say it makes connections
between people.  You have something speciﬁc in mind, but the words coming out of
your mouth are so general that - although you're not thinking of those other cases -
they could apply equally well to Facebook or telegraph lines.  Paul Graham has no idea
at all what you're trying to describe and is giving you blank looks.
• The worse version - and the reason why Paul Graham doesn't just trust you, even if
he thinks you're honest - is the case where you yourself want to believe your startup
is better than Facebook, but you can't think of any speciﬁc thing your startup does
better than Facebook, so you think of other abstract generalizations that seem to
support the conclusion, like "We have smarter people" or "We got more funding
earlier."  Where fuzzy thinking is motivated, overly abstract thinking is motivated.
• Abstract words can also avoid emotion.  George Orwell:  "Defenceless villages are
bombarded from the air, the inhabitants driven out into the countryside, the cattle
machine-gunned, the huts set on ﬁre with incendiary bullets: this is
called paciﬁcation."  Or contrast "Humanity is awful, it'd be better for the planet if we
all died" to "Everyone including my little sister is awful, we'd be better oﬀ if everyone

died including her."  To feel sympathy, we need enough concrete detail that our
emotions can model-check the picture and be activated.
• Cognitive-behavioral therapy is the big experimentally supported version of therapy,
for anyone not aware of this, bearing very little resemblance to anything
Freudian.  CBT talks about using requests for speciﬁc details to interrupt thoughts
looping around vague but aﬀectively laden centers, like "I am a good husband", "I am
a bad husband", or "my roommate is a slob".  How are you a good husband?  How are
you a bad husband?  Which speciﬁc feature of your roommate are you objecting to?
 Taboo the emotionally valent word at the center, like "slob", and replace it with
something that's speciﬁc enough to be testable, or concrete enough to be acted upon.
•• Contrast also "It bothers me when you leave soda cans on the table" vs. "You're
such a slob, stop being such a slob."  Or contrast:  "I'm upset" -> "I'm upset because I
think the other person is looking down on me" -> "I'm upset because the person's
tone of voice sounds like people who looked down on me in high school".  This is
related to the incredibly important skill, search for the historical causes of your
thoughts, rather than their justiﬁcations.
• Focusing on the speciﬁc details of a concrete example, instead of repeating a word
or arguing about a category, can interrupt Sneaking in Connotations and Arguing By
Deﬁnition.
• All the failures of concreteness warned against in the Mysterious Answers sequence,
where you go on and on about how Wulky Wilkinsen is a post-utopian without ever
once asking or imagining how the world ought to look, and what you yourself should
experience, if that were true or alternatively false.
• Visualizing speciﬁc examples often improves quality of thought in general - we're
often smarter when we're using both model-checking and deduction, visualizing a
picture of what we're supposed to be reasoning about, constantly checking our
deductive steps against some speciﬁc model those deductions are supposed to be
true about.  Saith Richard Feynman:
I had a scheme, which I still use today when somebody is explaining something
that I'm trying to understand: I keep making up examples. For instance, the
mathematicians would come in with a terriﬁc theorem, and they're all excited. As
they're telling me the conditions of the theorem, I construct something which ﬁts
all the conditions. You know, you have a set (one ball) - disjoint (two halls). Then
the balls turn colors, grow hairs, or whatever, in my head as they put more
conditions on. Finally they state the theorem, which is some dumb thing about the
ball which isn't true for my hairy green ball thing, so I say, "False!"
 If it's true, they get all excited, and I let them go on for a while. Then I point out
my counterexample.
"Oh. We forgot to tell you that it's Class 2 Hausdorﬀ homomorphic."
"Well, then," I say, "It's trivial! It's trivial!"
• Being speciﬁc helps notice and call bluﬀs, should you be mischievously inclined.
"Beware, demon!" he intoned hollowly.  "I am not without defenses."
"Oh yeah?  Name three."
 -- Robert Asprin, Another Fine Myth

Wannabe executive:  "I will improve communications between employees and
management."
Me:  "Can you give me a speciﬁc example of how you would do that?"
Known exercises for this skill:
Rationalist Taboo
In our previous Rationality Camps, Anna found that her attempt to teach a unit on
"Being Speciﬁc" didn't seem to work.  Her central exercise was picking a category and
asking people to name examples.
This isn't to say that the Camps were unsuccessful at teaching the skill.  Attendees
picked it up, not from the explicit unit, but from all the instructors having to
repeatedly ask the attendees to be more speciﬁc, and then having to ask them again,
while being speciﬁc themselves, until the attendees picked up the rhythm by example
and feedback.
Given our present teaching technology, this skill seems transmissible from master to
apprentice, but not yet replicable by exercises.  That's why we're turning it over to
you.

LessWrong downtime 2012-03-26, and
site speed
Our investigation into last week's LW downtime is complete: here (Google Docs).
Executive summary:
We failed to update our AWS conﬁguration after changes at Amazon, which caused a
cycle of servers being spawned then killed before they could properly boot. Our
automated testing should have notiﬁed us of this failure immediately, but included a
predictable failure mode (identiﬁed by us last year but not ﬁxed). We became aware of
the downtime when I checked my email and worked on it until it was resolved.
I personally feel very bad about our multiple failures leading to this incident.
ref. the last time I did this to
you: http://lesswrong.com/lw/29v/lesswrong_downtime_20100511_and_other_recent/
Actions:
1. We have reconﬁgured AWS and the tools we use to communicate with it to avoid
this failure in the future.
2. Improvements to our automated site testing system (Nagios) are underway
(expected to be live before 2012-04-13 - these tests will detect greater-than-X-
failures-from-Y-trials, rather than the current detect zero-successes-from-Z-
trials).
3. We have changed our staﬃng in part in recognition that some systems
(including this one) had been allowed to fall out of date, and allocated a
developer to review our system administration project planning.
 
Further actions - site speed:
We're unhappy with the site's speed. We plan on spending some time next week doing
what we can to improve it.
 
(If you upvote this post, please downvote my "Karma sink" comment below - I would
prefer not to earn karma from an event like this.)

Cryonics without freezers:
resurrection possibilities in a Big
World
And fear not lest Existence closing your
Account, should lose, or know the type no more;
The Eternal Saki from the Bowl has pour'd
Millions of Bubbles like us, and will pour.
When You and I behind the Veil are past,
Oh, but the long long while the World shall last,
Which of our Coming and Departure heeds
As much as Ocean of a pebble-cast.
    -- Omar Khayyam, Rubaiyat
 
A CONSEQUENTIALIST VIEW OF IDENTITY
The typical argument for cryonics says that if we can preserve brain data, one day we
may be able to recreate a functioning brain and bring the dead back to life.
The typical argument against cryonics says that even if we could do that, the
recreation wouldn't be "you". It would be someone who thinks and acts exactly like
you.
The typical response to the typical argument against cryonics says that identity isn't
in speciﬁc atoms, so it's probably in algorithms, and the recreation would have the
same mental algorithms as you and so be you. The gap in consciousness of however
many centuries is no more signiﬁcant than the gap in consciousness between going to
bed at night and waking up in the morning, or the gap between going into a coma and
coming out of one.
We can call this a "consequentialist" view of identity, because it's a lot like the
consequentialist views of morality. Whether a person is "me" isn't a function of how
we got to that person, but only of where that person is right now: that is, how similar
that person's thoughts and actions are to my own. It doesn't matter if we got to him
by having me go to sleep and wake up as him, or got to him by having aliens
disassemble my brain and then simulate it on a cellular automaton. If he thinks like
me, he's me.
A corollary of the consequentialist view of identity says that if someone wants to
create ﬁfty perfect copies of me, all ﬁfty will "be me" in whatever sense that means
something.
GRADATIONS OF IDENTITY
An argument against cryonics I have never heard, but which must exist somewhere,
says that even the best human technology is imperfect, and likely a few atoms here

and there - or even a few entire neurons - will end up out of place. Therefore, the
recreation will not be you, but someone very very similar to you.
And the response to this argument is "Who cares?" If by "me" you mean Yvain as of
10:20 PM 4th April 2012, then even Yvain as of 10:30 is going to have some serious
diﬀerences at the atomic scale. Since I don't consider myself a diﬀerent person every
ten minutes, I shouldn't consider myself a diﬀerent person if the resurrection-machine
misplaces a few cells here or there.
But this is a slippery slope. If my recreation is exactly like me except for one neuron, is
he the same person? Signs point to yes. What about ﬁve neurons? Five million? Or on
a functional level, what if he blinked at exactly one point where I would not have done
so? What if he prefers a diﬀerent ﬂavor of ice cream? What if he has exactly the same
memories as I do, except for the outcome of one ﬁrst-grade spelling bee I haven't
thought about in years anyway? What if he is a Hindu fundamentalist?
If we're going to take a consequentialist view of identity, then my continued ability to
identify with myself even if I naturally switch ice cream preferences suggests I should
identify with a botched resurrection who also switches ice cream preferences. The
only solution here that really makes sense is to view identity in shades of gray instead
of black-and-white. An exact clone is more me than a clone with diﬀerent ice cream
preferences, who is more me than a clone who is a Hindu fundamentalist, who is more
me than LeBron James is.
BIG WORLDS
There are various theories lumped together under the title "big world".
The simplest is the theory that the universe (or multiverse) is Very Very Big. Although
the universe is probably only 15 billion years old, which means the visible universe is
only 30 billion light years in size, inﬂation allows the entire universe to get around the
speed of light restriction; it could be very large or possibly inﬁnite. I don't have the
numbers available, but I remember a back of the envelope calculation being posted
on Less Wrong once about exactly how big the universe would have to be to contain
repeating patches of about the size of the Earth. That is, just as the ﬁrst ten digits of
pi, 3141592653, must repeat somewhere else in pi because pi is inﬁnite and
patternless, and just as I would believe this with high probability even if pi were not
inﬁnite but just very very large, so the arrangement of atoms that make up Earth
would recur in an inﬁnite or very very large universe. This arrangement would
obviously include you, exactly as you are now. A much larger class of Earth-sized
patches would include slightly diﬀerent versions of you like the one with diﬀerent ice
cream preferences. This would also work, as Omar Khayyam mentioned in the quote
at the top, if the universe were to last forever or a very very long time.
The second type of "big world" is the one posited by the Many Worlds theory of
quantum mechanics, in which each quantum event causes the Universe to split into
several branches. Because quantum events determine larger-level events, and
because each branch continues branching, some these branches could be similar to
our universe but with observable macro-scale diﬀerences. For example, there might
be a branch in which you are the President of the United States, or the Pope, or died
as an infant. Although this sounds like a silly popular science version of the principle, I
don't think it's unfair or incorrect.
The third type of "big world" is modal realism: the belief that all possible worlds exist,

maybe in proportion to their simplicity (whatever that means). We notice the
existence of our own world only for indexical reasons: that is, just as there are many
countries, but when I look around me I only see my own; so there are many
possibilities, but when I look around me I only see my own. If this is true, it is not only
possible but certain that there is a world where I am Pope and so on.
There are other types of "big worlds" that I won't get into here, but if any type at all is
correct, then there should be very many copies of me or people very much like me
running around.
CRYONICS WITHOUT FREEZERS
Cryonicists say that if you freeze your brain, you may experience "waking up" a few
centuries later when someone uses the brain to create a perfect copy of you.
But whether or not you freeze your brain, a Big World is creating perfect copies of you
all the time. The consequentialist view of identity says that your causal connection
with these copies is unnecessary for them to be you. So why should a copy of you
created by a far-future cryonicist with access to your brain be better able to
"resurrect" you than a copy of you that comes to exist for some other reason?
For example, suppose I choose not to sign up for cryonics, have a sudden heart
attack, and die in my sleep. Somewhere in a Big World, there is someone exactly like
me except that they didn't have the heart attack and they wake up healthy the next
morning.
The cryonicists believe that having a healthy copy of you come into existence after
you die is suﬃcient for you to "wake up" as that copy. So why wouldn't I "wake up" as
the healthy, heart-attack-free version of me in the universe next door?
Or: suppose that a Friendly AI ﬁlls a human-sized three-dimensional grid with atoms,
using a quantum dice to determine which atom occupies each "pixel" in the grid. This
splits the universe into as many branches as there are possible permutations of the
grid (presumably a lot) and in one of those branches, the AI's experiment creates a
perfect copy of me at the moment of my death, except healthy. If creating a perfect
copy of me causes my "resurrection", then that AI has just resurrected me as surely as
cryonics would have.
The only downside I can see here is that I have less measure (meaning I exist in a
lower proportion of worlds) than if I had signed up for cryonics directly. This might be a
problem if I think that my existence beneﬁts others - but I don't think I should be
concerned for my own sake. Right now I don't go to bed at night weeping that my
father only met my mother through a series of unlikely events and so most universes
probably don't contain me; I'm not sure why I should do so after having been
resurrected in the far future.
RESURRECTION AS SOMEONE ELSE
What if the speculative theories involved in Big Worlds all turn out to be false? All
hope is still not lost.
Above I wrote:

An exact clone is more me than a clone with diﬀerent ice cream preferences, who
is more me than a clone who is a Hindu fundamentalist, who is more me than
LeBron James is.
I used LeBron James because from what I know about him, he's quite diﬀerent from
me. But what if I had used someone else? One thing I learned upon discovering Less
Wrong is that I had previously underestimated just how many people out there are
*really similar to me*, even down to weird interests, personality quirks, and sense of
humor. So let's take the person living in 2050 who is most similar to me now. I can
think of several people on this site alone who would make a pretty impressive lower
bound on how similar the most similar person to me would have to be.
In what way is this person waking up on the morning of January 1 2050 equivalent to
me being sort of resurrected? What if this person is more similar to Yvain(2012) than
Yvain(1995) is? What if I signed up for cryonics, died tomorrow, and was resurrected in
2050 by a process about as lossy as the diﬀerence between me and this person?
SUMMARY
Personal identity remains confusing. But some of the assumptions cryonicists make
are, in certain situations, suﬃcient to guarantee personal survival after death without
cryonics.

Hofstadter's Superrationality
Possibly the main and original inspiration for Yudkowsky's various musings on what
advanced game theories should do (eg. cooperate in the Prisoner's Dilemma) is a set
of essays penned by Douglas Hofstadter (of Godel, Escher, Bach) 1983. Unfortunately,
they were not online and only available as part of a dead-tree collection. This is
unfortunate. Fortunately the collection is available through the usual pirates as a scan,
and I took the liberty of transcribing by hand the relevant essays with images,
correcting errors, annotating with links, etc: http://www.gwern.net/docs/1985-
hofstadter
The 3 essays:
1. discuss the Prisoner's dilemma, the misfortune of defection, what sort of
cooperative reasoning would maximize returns in a souped-up Prisoner's
dilemma, and then oﬀers a public contest
2. then we learn the results of the contest, and a discussion of ecology and the
tragedy of the commons
3. ﬁnally, Hofstadter gives an extended parable about cooperation in the face of
nuclear warfare; it is fortunate for us that it applies to most existential threats as
well
I hope you ﬁnd them educational. I am not 100% conﬁdent of the math transcriptions
since the original ebook messed some of them up; if you ﬁnd any apparent mistakes
or typos, please leave comments.

Why I Moved from AI to Neuroscience,
or: Uploading Worms
This post is shameless self-promotion, but I'm told that's probably okay in the
Discussion section. For context, as some of you are aware, I'm aiming to model C.
elegans based on systematic high-throughput experiments - that is, to upload a worm.
I'm still working on course requirements and lab training at Harvard's Biophysics Ph.D.
program, but this remains the plan for my thesis.
Last semester I gave this lecture to Marvin Minsky's AI class, because Marvin
professes disdain for everything neuroscience, and I wanted to give his students—and
him—a fair perspective of how basic neuroscience might be changing for the better,
and seems a particularly exciting ﬁeld to be in right about now. The lecture is about 22
minutes long, followed by over an hour of questions and answers, which cover a lot of
the memespace that surrounds this concept. Afterward, several students reported to
me that their understanding of neuroscience was transformed.
I only just now got to encoding and uploading this recording; I believe that many of
the topics covered could be of interest to the LW community (especially those with a
background in AI and an interest in brains), perhaps worthy of discussion, and I hope
you agree.

Let's create a market for cryonics
My uncle works in insurance. I recently mentioned that I'm planning to sign up for
cryonics.
"That's amazing," he said. "Convincing a young person to buy life insurance? That has
to be the greatest scam ever."
I took the comment lightly, not caring to argue about it. But it got me thinking
- couldn't cryonics be a great opportunity for insurance companies to make a bunch of
money?
Consider:
1. Were there a much stronger demand for cryonics, cryonics organizations would
ﬂourish through competition, outside investment, and internal reinvestment.
Costs would likely fall, and this would be good for cryonicists in general.
2. If cryonics organizations ﬂourish, this increases the probability of cryonics
working. I can think of a bunch of ways in which this could happen; perhaps, for
example, it would encourage the creation of safety nets whereby the failure of
individual companies doesn't result in anyone getting thawed. It would increase
R&D on both perfusion and reviviﬁcation, encourage entrepreneurs to explore
new related business models, etcetera.
3. Increasing the demand for cryonics increases the demand for life insurance
policies; thus insurance companies have a strong incentive to increase the
demand for cryonics. Many large insurance companies would like nothing more
than to usher in a generation of young people that want to buy life insurance.1
4. The demand for cryonics could be increased by an insightful marketing
campaign by an excellent marketing agency with an enormous budget... like
those used by big insurance companies.2 A quick Googling says that ad
spending by insurance companies exceeded $4.15 billion in 2009.
Almost a year ago, Strange7 suggested that cryonics organizations could run this kind
of marketing campaign. I think he's wrong - there's no way CI or Alcor have the
money. But the biggest insurance companies do have the money, and I'd be shocked
if these companies or their agencies aren't already dumping all kinds of money into
market research.
What would doing this require? 
1. That an open-minded person in the insurance industry who is in the position to
direct this kind of funding exists. I don't have a sense of how likely this is.
2. That we can locate/get an audience with the person from step 1. I think research
and networking could get this done, especially if the higher-status among us are
interested.
3. That we can ﬁnd someone who is capable and willing to explain this clearly and
convincingly to the person from step 1. I'm not sure it would be that diﬃcult. In
the startup world, strangers convince strangers to speculatively spend millions
of dollars every week. Hell, I'll do it.
I want to live in a world where cryonics ads air on TV just as often as ads for
everything else people spend money on. I really can see an insurance company

owning this project - if they can a) successfully revamp the image of cryonics and b)
become known as the household name for it when the market gets big, they will make
lots of money.
What do you think? Where has my reasoning failed? Does anyone here know anyone
powerful in insurance? 
Lastly, taking a cue from ciphergoth: this is not the place to rehash all the old
arguments about cryonics. I'm asking about a very speciﬁc idea about marketing and
life insurance, not requesting commentary on cryonics itself. Thanks!
1 Perhaps modeling the potential size of the market would oﬀer insight here. If it turns
out that this idea is not insane, I'll ﬁnd a way to make it happen. I could use your help.
2 Consider what happened with diamonds in the 1900s:
... N. W. Ayer suggested that through a well-orchestrated advertising and public-relations campaign it could have a significant impact on
the "social attitudes of the public at large and thereby channel American spending toward larger and more expensive diamonds instead of
"competitive luxuries." Specifically, the Ayer study stressed the need to strengthen the association in the public's mind of diamonds with
romance. Since "young men buy over 90% of all engagement rings" it would be crucial to inculcate in them the idea that diamonds were a
gift of love: the larger and finer the diamond, the greater the expression of love. Similarly, young women had to be encouraged to view
diamonds as an integral part of any romantic courtship.

Peter Singer and Tyler Cowen
transcript
In March 2009, Tyler Cowen (blog) interviewed Peter Singer about morality, giving, and
how we can most improve the world. They are both thinkers I respect a lot, and I was
excited to read their debate. Unfortunately the interview was available only as a
video. I wanted a transcript, so I made one:
Cowen: This is Tyler Cowen of George Mason University. I'm doing a BloggingHeads
with Peter Singer, the world-famous philosopher from Princeton. This is a
forum on Peter's latest book, which he'll start oﬀ by telling you a bit about.
Singer: Hi. The book's called "The Life You Can Save: Acting Now To End World
Poverty". It begins with an argument that I've used many times in articles
about a child drowning in a pond, and suggests that if you saw a child
drowning in a pond that you would jump in and save that child, and you think
that is what you ought to do, even if it meant that you ruined an expensive
pair of shoes that you were wearing.
From there I pull back to saying "what does this mean about the problem of
world poverty, given that there are, according to Unicef, ten million children
dying of avoidable poverty-related causes every year?" We could save some
of them, and probably it wouldn't cost us much more than the cost of an
expensive pair of shoes if we ﬁnd an eﬀective aid agency that is doing
something to combat the causes of world poverty, or perhaps to combat the
deaths of children from simple conditions like diarrhea or measles, conditions
that are not that hard to prevent or to cure. We could probably save a life for
the cost of a pair of shoes. So why don't we? What's the problem here? Why
do we think it's ok to live a comfortable, even luxurious, life while children
are dying? In the book I explore various objections to that view, I don't ﬁnd
any of them really convincing. I look at some of the psychological barriers to
giving, and I acknowledge that they are problems. And I consider also some
of the objections to aid and questions raised by economists as to whether aid
really works. In the end I come to a proposal by which I want to change the
culture of giving.
The aim of the book in a sense is to get us to internalize the view that not to
do anything for those living in poverty, when we are living in luxury and
abundance, is ethically wrong, that it's not just not a nice thing to do but that
a part of living an ethically decent life is at least to do something signiﬁcant
for the poor. The book ends with a chapter in which I propose a realistic
standard, which I think most people in the aﬄuent world could meet without
great hardship. It involves giving 1% of your income if you're in the bottom
90% of US taxpayers, scaling up through 5% and 10% and even more as you
get into the top 10%, the top 5%, the top 1% of US taxpayers. But at no point
is the scale I'm proposing what I believe is an excessively burdensome one.
I've set up a website, thelifeyoucansave.com that people can go to in order
to publicly pledge that they will meet this scale, because I think if people will
do it publicly, that in itself will encourage other people to do it and, hopefully,
the idea will spread.

Cowen: Thank you, Peter. Let me ﬁrst stress: I agree with most of what's in your book;
I think we all could give more and should give more. It would be good for
other people and it would be good for ourselves. But let me start oﬀ the
dialogue by mentioning a few points where I don't completely agree with you.
One thing that struck me about the book was some of the omissions.
 
Immigration as an Anti-Poverty Program
Cowen: For instance, in my view, what is by far the best anti-poverty program, the
only one that's really been shown to work, and that's what's called
"immigration". I don't even see the word "immigration" in your book's index.
So why don't we spend a lot more resources allowing immigration, supporting
immigration, lobbying for immigration? This raises people's incomes very
dramatically, it's sustainable, for the most part it's also good for us. Why not
make that the centerpiece of an anti-poverty platform?
Singer: That's an interesting point, Tyler. I suppose, one question I'd like to ask is: is it
sustainable? Isn't it the case that if we take, as immigrants, the people who
are the most enterprising, perhaps, of the poor countries that we're still going
to leave those countries in poverty, and their populations may continue to
rise, and eventually, even if we keep taking immigrants, we will reach a
capacity where we're starting to strain our own country?
Cowen: There's two separate issues: one is "brain drain" from the third world. I think
here's a lot of research by [Michael Clemens], showing that it's not a
problem, that third world countries that have even somewhat functional
institutions tend to beneﬁt by sending people to other countries. India's a
good example: a lot of Indians return to India and start businesses, or they
send money back home. Mexico is another example. Maybe North Korea is
somewhat diﬀerent, but for the most part immigration seems to beneﬁt both
countries.
I don't think we could have open borders; I don't think we could have
unlimited immigration, but we're both sitting here in the United States and it
hardly seems to me that we're at the breaking point. Immigrants would
beneﬁt much more: their wages would rise by a factor of twenty or more, and
there would be perhaps some costs to us, but in a cost-beneﬁt sense it seems
far, far more eﬀective than sending them money. Do you agree?
Singer: I must admit that I haven't thought a lot about immigration as a way of
dealing with world poverty. Obviously, from what you're saying, I should be
thinking more about it, but I can't really say whether I agree until I have
thought more about it.
 
Changing Institutions: Greater Tax Break for True
Charity
Cowen: Let me try another question along related lines. I think one general way in
which I think about your book diﬀerently than you do, is that you think more
about giving. I'm a big advocate of giving, I've written a whole book myself
on philanthropy, but I think somewhat more in terms of changing institutions.

So another thing we might consider doing, along the lines of what you
advocate, is to increase the tax beneﬁts of giving. Right now, if you're
itemizing deductions and you give $1, you deduct $1 from your taxes. But it
wouldn't be very diﬃcult to make it the case that for certain kinds of giving
you could deduct $1.10 from your taxes or $1.20. Would you favor this kind
of reform?
Singer: I might favor that, if giving were deﬁned more narrowly than we do, in the US
anyway, because I know I can deduct $1 from my taxes whether I give to
Oxfam America, which I think is an eﬀective organization ﬁghting world
poverty, or if I give to the Met so they can buy yet another painting to add to
the already super-abundant collection of paintings they have. I don't see why
the taxpayer should subsidize me if I decide I want to give to the Met but
sure, if I'm giving to Oxfam I think that would be good.
Cowen: So, in other words, you favor a kind of tax cut as a way to help the world's
poor. That, in this country, if targeted properly, tax policy, in essence cutting
the taxes of rich people, is one of the very best ways to help the world's poor.
Would you sign on to that?
Singer: I'm not quite sure why it is ... you seem to have leapt a little from what I was
saying and I haven't followed the leap as to why cutting taxes for the rich
would be one of the most eﬀective ways of helping the poor. Can you explain
that a little more?
Cowen: If we give a greater tax break to charitable donations, and here I mean only
true charity, not say a fancy art museum, disproportionately this will beneﬁt
wealthy people. Wealthy people have a lot of money. In essence you're
cutting their taxes. They're giving more, they may not have a higher level of
consumption, but would you be willing to raise your hand and say "I, Peter
Singer, think that cutting taxes on the US wealthy is in fact one of the very
best things we could do for the world's poor, if we do it the right way"? Yes or
no?
Singer: Yes, if the tax break only goes to those of the wealthy who are giving to
organizations that are eﬀectively helping the poor, I'll raise my hand to that.
Cowen: OK; I'm glad to hear that.
 
Millennium Villages Skepticism
Cowen: Let me focus on another point of diﬀerence between us in the book. I think
when it comes to the eﬀectiveness of aid, I'm not a total skeptic on the
eﬀectiveness of aid but I think I'm more skeptical than you are. In a number
of places you site the work of Jeﬀrey Sachs. Now my view of Sachs is that his
projects are actually doing individual human beings a lot of good but the
return on investment I don't think is that high. I think he's improving the
health of a lot of people but I don't think he's going to raise any villages,
much less countries or continents, out of poverty. Given that my view is that
the rate of return on this investment is much lower, and I think that the
economics profession as a whole agrees with me, not with Sachs, this to me
suggests that to really make a dent in world poverty we would have to give
much more than 5% of our incomes, even more than 10%, that we're simply
at a point where we can do some good, but that to abolish poverty we would
have to engage in a very dramatic redistribution. What's your view on this?
Singer: Firstly, I think, as for whether Sachs is really going to succeed in raising

villages out of poverty, I think the data isn't in yet. The Millennium Villages
project which he's working on has only been going a few years, I think we
need to give it maybe another ﬁve years to see whether it's working. That's
more or less what he's said. He hopes that the aid will be short term, that the
villages will become self-sustaining, the improvements will last, they'll be out
of the poverty trap. If that hasn't happened at the end of another ﬁve years
I'm going to agree with you that we're going to need more, but I think it's
really too early to call the result on that one.
Cowen: Take the overall opinion of economists, which is again that Sachs's projects
can do good, people in those villages might be better oﬀ, but if you're in the
middle of, say, a totally corrupt African country which is not democratic,
which maybe has been ﬁghting wars, which has an absolutely horrible
infrastructure, which has a bureaucracy, a kleptocracy, massive problems,
lack of literacy, that maybe you could eliminate infectious diseases or
malaria within that village. People will be better oﬀ, it's worth doing, but at
the end of the day is there really any reason to think, given the last 300
years of thinking and writing on development and economic history that this
will at all cure poverty? Doesn't it just mean you'll have poor people without
malaria, which is better than poor people with malaria, but they're still
essentially poor people?
Singer: If the governments and the situation is as bad as you describe, you're
probably right, but of course not all countries ... you describe pretty much a
worst case scenario. I think there are a lot of countries where there are poor
people which do not have governments which are as bad as you painted. I
think in those countries we can hope that people actually will lift themselves
out of poverty and I think that's what we need to try to do. Now, you may be
right that that's still going to leave poor people in countries that are as bad
as you describe, and there is a real question then as to how much we can do
to help them, whether giving more will really be enough to help them or
because of those governments in those situations there's really nothing much
we can do. That will be the dilemma. But I don't think we've got to that point
yet because we've not really worked out what we can do for people in the
countries where the governments aren't so bad.
 
Chinese Reforms
Cowen: I think you and I are both looking for what are the most highly leveraged
ways we can reduce poverty in this world.
Singer: Uh huh
Cowen: If I ask myself, historically, what has been the most successful anti-poverty
program in the last century, I look at Communist China, and I would say that
the reforms, starting in the late 1970s, have taken at least 300M-400M
people, and probably more, and taken them from extreme poverty, perhaps
starvation, to a situation where a lot of them live quite well or at least have
some kind of tolerable lower middle class existence. I think that property
rights and institutional reforms are they key to ﬁghting poverty. China during
that period, the aid it received didn't matter much. It doesn't mean we
shouldn't give aid, I'm all for aid, but isn't the big leveraged investment here
changing and improving institutions and not giving money?
Singer: I do that that's a really important thing when we can do it. The question is,

can we do it? Obviously the Chinese reforms that you refer to really were
internally driven, I don't think they were a result of things the West did,
unless you talk about the entire global economic system, which China clearly
wanted to participate in. So the question is how can we be eﬀective in
producing those sorts of changes? In some countries we can come in and
help, say countries recovering from civil war, and give some help in
establishing good institutions, but I'm not sure what ideas you have about
what's a good way to bring about that kind of reform in these countries that
will lead everywhere to the sorts of beneﬁts that you refer to in China.
Cowen: In countries like China in a way it's internally driven. It's not that anyone
successfully pressured them, but in another way I think it's highly externally
driven, that the Chinese, Taiwanese, Koreans, other countries followed the
example of Japan They saw that Japan worked. They saw that an Asian
country could rise to moderate wealth or even riches and at some point they
decided to copy this in their own way. If we look at Japan, Japan copied the
west, so maybe one of the very best most important things we can do is just
ourselves be a beacon of progress: be humane, be tolerant, respect others,
be wealthy and just show that it's possible. We shouldn't think of that as a
substitute for aid, but maybe that's actually our number one priority. Does
that make sense to you?
Singer: That makes sense. I don't know that we have to strive to be more wealthy
than we are--well, maybe just right at this moment we need to strive to get
back to being as wealthy as we were a year ago perhaps. But I think we are
setting that example, undoubtedly. We are showing countries what can be
done with reasonably good government, open economies, and I do hope that
other countries will follow that. But maybe not all countries can do it. I think
that Paul Collier argues in his book that it's going to be diﬃcult for some
African countries to get into this game now. There are reasons why it's going
to be hard for them to compete with countries that have established
positions, have developed markets, have low labor costs. It's not clear to me
that this is going to be a path that every poor country can follow.
 
Military Intervention
Cowen: You mentioned Paul Collier. I found his book very interesting. One argument
he makes--I would say I'm not, myself, convinced but I'm curious to hear
what you think--is that we could do the world a great deal of good by
selective military interventions. So take the case of Darfur. A large number of
people are suﬀering, dying. Collier says, or implies, or at least opens the
possibility, that we, the United States, the UN, whoever, should just move in
and in military terms do something about this. It is again a topic that is not
prominent in your book, but it seems that if it can work it's highly leveraged,
more leveraged than giving away money. I'm curious as to your views on
that.
Singer: I did discuss humanitarian intervention in my earlier book One World and I do
support it under the right circumstances. I think, though, we do have to be
pretty clear about deﬁning it properly and trying to get support for it. Maybe
it would work in Darfur. I think Darfur is quite a large area, relatively thinly
populated, and it might take a lot of resources to really protect the people in
Darfur. There are underlying issues, too, perhaps about climate change,
even, that are causing scarcity in Darfur. But isn't possible, I mean I think

that Zimbabwe would be another possibility, though maybe just now with
changes in the political system you wouldn't want to do it just now, you'd
want to see how that played out for a while. But certainly a year ago you
might well have thought that if the South Africans could be persuaded to
move in and remove Mugabe that would be a good thing to do. That would
have been better, I think, than having a white former colonial power come in,
that obviously would have evoked a lot of echos of returning to a past that
Zimbabweans don't want. But I'm not, in principle opposed to military
intervention, I just think we have to be very very careful about the
circumstances in which we do it, because obviously it can trigger a lot of
violence and bloodshed and produce results that are the opposite of what
you and I would both want.
 
Colonialism
Cowen: Do you think the end of colonialism was a good thing or a bad thing for
Africa?
Singer: That's a really diﬃcult question. I think, clearly, there were lots of bad things
about colonialism, but you would have to say that some countries were
deﬁnitely better administered and that some people's lives, although they
may have had some sort of humiliation, perhaps through not being
independent, being ruled by people of a diﬀerent race, in some ways they
were better. It's hard, really, to draw that balance sheet. Independence has
certainly not been the unmitigated blessing that people thought it would be
at the time.
Cowen: Let's say we have the premise, that with colonialism there would not have
been wars between African nations. It's not the case that a British ruled
colony would have attacked a French colony, for instance. It's highly unlikely.
So given just that millions have perished from wars alone, wouldn't the
Utilitarian view, if you're going to take one, suggest that colonialism was
essentially a good idea for Africa, it was a shame that we got rid of it, and
that the continent would have been better oﬀ under foreign rule, European
foreign rule.
Singer: I don't think we can be so sure that it would have continued to be peaceful.
After all we did have militant resistance movements, we had the Mau Mau in
Kenya, for example. We had other militant resistance movements. It may
simply have been that the fact of white rule would have provoked not one
colony going to war against another but civil war within some of those
countries. If what you're asking is would colonialism, had it been accepted by
the people there, without military conﬂict, would that have been better than
some of the consequences we've had in some of these countries, you would
have to say undoubtedly yes. But we can't go back and wind back the clock
and say "how would it have been if" because we don't really know whether
that relative stability and peace would have lasted.
Cowen: If we compare the Mau Mau, say, to the wars in Kenya and Rwanda, it seems
unlikely that rebellions against colonial governments would have reached
that scope, especially if England, France, other countries, would have been
willing to spend more money to create some tolerable form of order. My
guess is you would have had a fair number of rebellions but it's highly highly

unlikely it would compare to the kind of virtual holocausts we've had in Africa
as it stands.
 
Aid without stable government
Singer: I certainly agree that if you look at what's been happening in the Congo, just
as one example, or countries like Sierra Leone or Liberia, yes, you could
certainly think that it might have been better for those countries.
Cowen: Would you say that Zimbabwe is one example of a country where just giving
it money through aid is unlikely to work?
Singer: At present, unless the government changes quite dramatically. Again, as you
were saying before, there might be speciﬁc things we can do: we may be
able to help particular people who have disease or are hungry, but I agree, in
the present conditions it's unlikely to lift people out of poverty on any kind of
large scale.
Cowen: Let's take a country like Madagascar, which as recently as two or three years
ago was touted by the Bush administration, and I don't just mean
Republicans, it was touted by many people, as being a kind of model for
Africa. Here's a country were we could give a lot of aid, the aid would go to
some good purpose, we're making progress, and now Madagascar seems to
be in the midst of a civil war and the polity is collapsing, the economy is
doing very poorly. How many countries in Africa do you think are there where
aid works? Where do you draw the line? What in your opinion is the marginal
country that is hopeless?
Singer: Look, I haven't got a list of African countries like that, I must admit. I think
there are some countries where things seem to work, and that's not to say I
could name a country and say, well, Mozambique, that aid programs have
made a positive diﬀerence, or Sierra Leone. Maybe in a month there'll be a
coup and you'll be able to tell me that I was wrong. I can't see the future. But
there are countries where I think aid has worked, ones where it hasn't
worked. I haven't got a rank ordering and I don't have a cutoﬀ line where that
is, I'm sorry I'm just not suﬃciently expert on African politics and conditions
to do that.
 
Genetically modifying ourselves to be more moral
Cowen: Let's try some philosophical questions. You're a philosopher, and I've been
very inﬂuenced by your writings on personal obligation. Apart from the
practical issue that we can give some money and have it do good, there's a
deeper philosophical question of how far those obligations extend, to give
money to other people. Is it a nice thing we could do, or are we actually
morally required to do so? What I see in your book is a tendency to say
something like "people, whether we like it or not, will be more committed to
their own life projects than to giving money to others and we need to work
within that constraint". I think we would both agree with that, but when we
get to the deeper human nature, or do you feel it represents a human
imperfection? If we could somehow question of "do we in fact like that fact?",
is that a fact you're comfortable with about human nature? If we could

imagine an alternative world, where people were, say, only 30% as
committed to their personal projects as are the people we know, say the
world is more like, in some ways, an ant colony, people are committed to the
greater good of the species. Would that be a positive change in human
nature or a negative change?
Singer: Of course, if you have the image of an ant colony everyone's going to say
"that's horrible, that's negative", but I think that's a pejorative image for
what you're really asking ...
Cowen: No, no, I don't mean a colony in a negative sense. People would cooperate
more, ants aren't very bright, we would do an ant colony much better than
the ants do. ...
Singer: But we'd also be thinking diﬀerently, right? What people don't like about ant
colonies is ants don't think for themselves. What I would like is a society in
which people thought for themselves and voluntarily decided that one of the
most satisfying and fulﬁlling things they could do would be to put more of
their eﬀort and more of their energy into helping people elsewhere in need. If
that's the question you're asking, then yes, I think it would be a better world
if people were readier to make those concerns their own projects.
Cowen: Let's say genetic engineering is possible, which is now not so far oﬀ on the
major scale, and your daughter were having a daughter, and she asked you
"daddy, should I program my daughter so that she's willing to sell her baby
and take the money and send it to Haitians to save ten babies in Haiti".
Would you recommend to her "yes, you should program the genes of your
baby so she's that way"?
Singer: So she's going to sell her baby? What's going to happen to the baby?
Cowen: She's going to sell it to some wealth white couple that's infertile, they live in
the Paciﬁc Northwest, they'll take ﬁne care of it, she'll receive $1M and save,
say, 30 lives in Haiti. You've recommended that your granddaughter be
programmed to act this way. Would you recommend that?
Singer: And so she's going to be happy with that? She's not going to suﬀer as current
people would the pangs of separation from their daughter or the agonies of
not knowing what's happened to my daughter? She's going to feel perfectly
comfortable with that, and she's going to feel good about the fact that she's
helped 30 babies in Haiti to have a decent life? Is that the assumption?
Cowen: We can do it that way, but keep in mind that even if she's unhappy that's
outweighed by the 30 Haitian lives which are saved. Either way you want.
Singer: Right, but you're asking me and I'm like normal human beings, I haven't been
reprogrammed, so I care about my daughter or my granddaughter, or
whoever this is.
Cowen: Ok, she'll be happy.
Singer: Ok, good. Then I think I'm on board with your program.
Cowen: So you would want people to be much more cooperative in this way, if we
could manage it in some way that won't wreck their psyches.
Singer: That's right.
Cowen: Do you think people would have a moral obligation to genetically reprogram
themselves, or it would just be a nice thing they could do if they felt so
inclined?
Singer: I think if we really had a system that was as good as you're saying, would
lead to as good consequences, and would leave people happy, that's
something they ought to do. Because that would really be a way of making a

huge diﬀerence to the world. They would be wrong not to take advantage of
this, given the beneﬁts it involves and the absence, it seems, as described, of
any major drawbacks.
 
Problem areas in Utilitarianism
Cowen: What do you think is the biggest problem area in Utilitarian moral theory?
Singer: The biggest problem area? One problem people are talking about that's
relevant to what I'm talking about is that Utilitarian moral theory leads to
highly demanding consequences that people reject. So that's one problem.
The second problem, of course, is that it requires very complex calculations
because we don't have a set of simple moral rules that say "don't do this, do
that". We have to work out what the consequences of our actions are. As in
this area we're talking about, what kind of aid is eﬀective, what will overcome
world poverty, it's very diﬃcult to work out what the consequences are, and
it's sometimes very diﬃcult to know what's the right thing to do.
Cowen: But you think we nevertheless should do what we think is best, no matter
how imperfect that guess may be?
Singer: Yeah, I don't really see what else we're supposed to do. It would seem to me
to be wrong to say "because I can't calculate the consequences I'm just going
to follow this simple set of rules". Because I can't calculate the
consequences. But why follow this simple set of rules? Where do they come
from? I don't believe that we have any god-given rules. I don't think that our
moral intuitions are a good source of rules, because that's the product of our
evolutionary history, which may not be appropriate for the moment that
we're in. So, despite the diﬃculty, I don't really see what the alternative is, to
trying our best to ﬁgure out what the expected utility is.
 
Is Utilitarianism independent?
Cowen: Let me toss up a classic criticism of Utilitarianism. I'm curious to see what
you say. The criticism is this, that neither pain nor pleasure is a homogeneous
thing. There are many diﬀerent kinds of pains and pleasures and they're not
strictly commensurable in terms of any natural unit. So when we're
comparing pain and pleasure that's a ﬁne thing to do, but in fact we're calling
upon other values. So Utilitarianism is in this sense parasitic upon some
deeper sense of philosophic pluralism, and we're not pure utilitarians at all.
But that being the case, why don't we sometimes just allow an intuitive sense
of right or wrong to override what would otherwise be the Utilitarian
conclusion, since Utilitarianism itself cannot avoid value judgments?
Singer: I think the form of Utilitarianism that you're describing is Hedonistic
Utilitarianism because you were talking about pleasure and pain and you
were suggesting that pleasure is a whole range of diﬀerent things. The form
that I hold is Preference Utilitarianism which looks at people's preferences
and tries to asses the importance of the preference for them. Now this is still
not an easy thing to know, in fact in some ways you might say it's harder
than getting measures of pleasure and pain, but I think it already embraces
the pluralism that you're talking about in terms of people's preferences,

people's understanding of what it is they're choosing and why. And so I don't
think it's up to us to go back and try to pull in other kinds of values that we
intuitively hold over the top of people's preferences. We can do it for
ourselves, each of us can say "what are my preferences", "I value this", "I
value the autonomous life over the happy life, and so that's what I'm going to
choose". Of course, when I weigh out your preferences I should say "well here
we give weight for the preference for an autonomous life and here we give
weight to the preference for the pleasant life" but in making the ﬁnal
judgment, in which we take everyone's preferences into account, it would be
wrong for us to just pull out some intuitive values and somehow give them
weight in the overall calculation because then we're giving more weight to
our preferences than we're giving to those of others.
Cowen: But doesn't preference utilitarianism itself require some means of
aggregation? The means we use for weighing diﬀerent clashing preferences,
can require some kind of value judgments above and beyond Utilitarianism?
Singer: I don't quite see why that should be so. While acknowledging the practical
diﬀerences of actually weighing up and calculating all the preferences, I fail
to see why it involves other values apart from the preferences themselves.
 
Peter Singer: Jewish Moralist
Cowen: Let me try giving you my reading of Peter Singer, which is highly speculative,
and I'm not even saying it's true, it's just what I think when I read you,
especially the later Peter Singer, and I'm just curious to hear your reaction to
it. My reading is this: that Peter Singer stands in a long and great tradition of
what I would call "Jewish moralists" who draw upon Jewish moral teachings in
somehow asking for or demanding a better world. Someone who stands in
the Jewish moralist tradition can nonetheless be quite a secular thinker, but
your later works tend more and more to me to reﬂect this initial upbringing.
You're a kind of secular Talmudic scholar of Utilitarianism, trying to do Mishna
on the classic notion of human well being and bring to the world this kind of
idea that we all have obligations to do things that make other people better
oﬀ, that you're very much out of the classic European, Austrian, Viennese,
ultimately Biblical tradition about our obligations to the world. What do you
say?
Singer: I'm amused, I have to say. I think it's interesting. You're right that I come from
a Jewish family. It was a pretty secular Jewish family, so I never got as a child,
actually, a lot of Jewish teaching, never went to Jewish Sunday school, I never
learned Hebrew, I never had a Bar Mitzvah, I never read the Torah. So if I had
got some of that it must have come kind of at a distance through, sort of,
osmosis, as you say this vaguely Jewish Viennese culture that certainly was
part of my family background but was very much secularized. The interesting
thing to speculate is whether I'm doing something that, say, someone out of
the British Utilitarian tradition, the tradition of Bentham and Mill and Sidgwick
could not have done. What are the distinctive features of my version of
Utilitarianism that they would have rejected? And if there is something, it
probably is attributable to that background you mention. But I'd be interested
in your answer, what do you think that there is in my view that Bentham or
Mill or Sidgwick could not have whole-heartedly endorsed?
Cowen: I'm not sure if there's anything, but I think the mere fact that it is you who is

doing it nonetheless reﬂects something about this. I think of you as one of
the worlds greatest theologians, in a way, having this understanding of the
quality of mercy, which is put into a secular framework, but what the
intuitions really consist of, I think none of us really ever know where our
moral intuitions come from.
Singer: Ok. Well, look. It's a possible view, as I think you said introducing it, you don't
know whether it's true but it's an interesting view of me and where I come
from. You've put it out there. I ﬁnd it hard to look internally, so I'll leave it to
others to judge which of the elements of my background they see having
formed me most strongly.
 
What charities does Peter Singer give to?
Cowen: Let me try a personal question but feel free to pass on this one. Let's say
someone has read your book and they say "I'm on board, Peter, please tell
me what charities you give to." You mentioned Oxfam, but would you have
anything speciﬁc you'd like to say? And why?
Singer: I do support Oxfam substantially, I've got a long relationship with, diﬀerent
Oxfams. They're actually autonomous national groups that work together, so
when I ﬁrst became interested in this issue as a graduate student, way back
in Oxford in the '70s, I was living in Oxford and that's the headquarters of the
original Oxfam, Oxfam UK, so I got in touch with them and remain connected
with their oﬃce. Then I went to Australia and was involved with Oxfam
Australia, now I'm involved with Oxfam America. I like what they do good
grassroots work, I've seen some of that, helping the most underprivileged
people, plus they're not afraid to be a real advocate for the poor, to tackle
big mining companies that are pushing the poor oﬀ their land, tackle the US
government and its agricultural subsidies. That's one reason that I like them.
But there are many good organizations around. I've recently started
supporting GiveWell, you can ﬁnd them on givewell.net, because they're
doing something that I'm sure you would support: they're trying to get aid
organizations to demonstrate their eﬃcacy, to be more transparent about
why they support some projects rather than others, and to show how much it
costs for them to achieve their goals, whether those goals are saving lives or
lifting people out of poverty. And so it's kind of at a meta level, saying I want
to improve aid by helping organizations that are trying to do that. I think
that's a really highly leveraged way of making an impact on what's going to
happen in aid over the next couple of decades.
 
Zero-Overhead Giving
Cowen: I'm a big fan of what I call zero overhead giving, that is I send monetary
transfers to poor people, maybe I've met them on my travels, by Western
Union. I don't follow up, I don't monitor, there's no tax deduction, there's no
overhead, it's just money from me to them. What do you think of that as a
way of giving?
Singer: Interesting. I suppose I would like to have some followup. I would worry that I
was getting conned. Now, you may have a good sense of who's genuine and
who's not, but we all know there's con artists working here in New York city,

in other cities in America, who could tell you wonderful stories about how
they just need the bus fare home and then they'll be ﬁne, and you give them
the bus fare home, and you believe them and then next month they come up
to you in the same spot and tell you the same story. So I would like some kind
of auditing, but let me just say for people who do want to give direct I think
not with zero overhead but I think with 10% overhead, if you go to Kiva,
kiva.org, you can give a microloan to someone who is online, tells you what
they want. You'll eventually, mostly, get your money back and you can lend it
to someone else. I think that's quite an eﬀective way of helping people too.
Cowen: How do you know a good charity when you see one? Is low overhead really a
good measure? Those numbers are very easily manipulated.
Singer: I agree. No, "low overhead" is not the right measure. Firstly, as you say, the
numbers are manipulated. Second, look, you could cut your overhead by
cutting your evaluation, exactly what we were talking about. You could say
"look, I'm not going to do any followup or evaluation I'm just going to hand
out, basically what you said. I'm going to hand out money to poor people."
That way you can get your overhead down, but are you actually doing the
most good? I think you don't know that until you do have some people in the
ﬁeld who are in touch with what's been happening and do follow up. So I'm
looking for the kind of demonstrated eﬀectiveness that you can ﬁnd in the
reports from GiveWell at givewell.net rather than just checking how much of
it goes to overheads and administration and how much of it doesn't.
Cowen: Keep in mind, Utilitarian calculations are very diﬃcult, as we discussed a few
minutes ago, but you don't have to listen to con stories from con men. Just ﬂy
to an Indian village, ask for people's names, get the village phone number,
pick names of people who appear to be poor, they're not expecting you to
show up, and send them some money. It seems to me if there's anything
were you would think the chance of this doing good is really quite high it
would be just sending money, and even well run charities have pretty high
overhead, and you can give the money directly. Western Union has a bit of
overhead, but it's relatively low. Why not have this method replace a lot of
charitable giving? Because we know there's massive poverty, we know
there's people who need to eat, and if someone needs to eat and you give
them money, they're going to spend it on food, no?
Singer: But you can't say there's no overhead if you, say, ﬂy to an Indian village.
There's a lot of overhead, unless you're a very wealthy person. The cost of
your trip, not to mention your time, is a very substantial overhead on the
amount that you're giving.
Cowen: But say you're traveling anyway. You take trips, as it is, right? You go to poor
countries, for other reasons. You could do a side trip to a poorer part of an
urban city, in Calcutta, it would take you an hour, maybe, it wouldn't take
much time. I would think at the margin there's a way for it to be quite cheap.
Singer: It may be, and the other thing you have to consider is whether putting money
directly in the hands of people, say, is better than bringing in a drill to
provide water for an entire village where presently they have to walk two
hours to carry water from a river and that water's polluted. Maybe some sort
of structural changes like that are going to help them more than just putting
money in the hands of individuals.
Cowen: Keep in mind, you're a Preference Utilitarian. That doesn't mean public goods
can't be more valuable, but the tendency of a Preference Utilitiarian should
be to just give people resources and let them do what they want, no?
Singer: I think that's an empirical question. As you say it will depend whether they

will actually satisfy their preferences more by individual action or whether
there's a kind of cooperative dilemma situation here, that actually they could
achieve more good by cooperating, but maybe their culture is such that they
don't cooperate unless there's some outside stimulus to get them to do so.
 
Moral Intuitions
Cowen: Here's a philosophical question again: do you trust your own moral intuitions?
Singer: No, not really. Over along time period, I guess, I've thought about them and
reﬂected on them, and I've dropped some or they've faded so maybe now I'm
somewhat more comfortable with them, but no, I couldn't really say that I
trust them as a whole.
Cowen: What's the moral intuition that you have which you trust least?
Singer: That's a good question. I suppose, the intuitions that you have are that you ...
I have intuitions about equality and fairness that make me want to go for
more egalitarian solutions and, yet, I'm not sure whether they are really the
right thing to do, so I'm somewhat critical of them but I'm still drawn by them
to some extent. Obviously things about equality can have Utilitarian beneﬁts
if we accept laws of diminishing marginal utility and so on, and I would like to
say that's the only sense in which I support equality, but I'm not sure that my
intuitions are not actually more egalitarian than I should be as a utilitarian.
 
Improving the world through commerce
Cowen: Let's say I'm an 18 year old and I'm in college, and I've read your book and
I'm more or less convinced by it, and I say to you "well what I've decided to
do is I'm going to have a career in the cell phone industry because I see that
cell phones are revolutionizing Africa and making many people much better
oﬀ. I'm not going to give a dime to poverty but I'm going to work my hardest
to become a millionaire by making cheaper and better cell phones." What do
you say to me?
Singer: Well, making cheaper and better cell phones may be great for Africa, and
while you're building up your business, of course, you want to reinvest your
capital and make the business bigger, but are you going to get to a point, at
some stage in your life, where you'll have a lot of money, where you've done
your work of providing the cheap cell phones, what are you going to do with
that money? I think that's still, for a Utilitarian, a relevant question. It's the
kind of question that Warren Buﬀet asked himself. He accumulated a lot of
money and said "look, I can make this money earn money faster than anyone
else, so I'm going to wait until I'm old before giving it away." And that was a
good thing, I guess, although now we might wish he'd given it away last year
rather than this year.
Cowen: That's right, but let's say I never give a dime, I've accumulated a fortune of
$200M, I've done a lot for the cell phone industry. Am I a better person than
someone who's earned $40K/year and every year given 15% of it away to the
poor in India?
Singer: Well I'm not sure that you're a ... "better person" asks for a judgment about
the character of the agent. I think it's quite possible you've done more good

for the world, and you should be congratulated on the good that you've done
for the world. We do tend to judge people by their intentions, and your
intentions are a little suspect because, although you've done a lot of good for
the cellphone industry and maybe for Africans you've still got this $200M.
Would you really be a lot happier with $200M than with $100M, $10M say.
And if not, then why not, in addition to the beneﬁts you've conferred on
people also use that $190M for something that will help people?
Cowen: If you're a Utilitarian, isn't it a little irrational to judge people by their
intentions? You're retreating to this "we". "We" judge people by their
intentions. You're not willing to say "I do" because that would make you
inconsistent. Why not just say "Utility is what matters, I'm a Utilitarian, this
person did more for the poor, this person is a better person than the one who
gave a lot to charity". It's not my personal view, I'm less of a strict Utilitarian,
but why not indeed embrace that conclusion rather than distance yourself
from it?
Singer: Because, as a Utilitarian, praise and blame have a function, to encourage
people to do good and not to do things that are bad---
Cowen: --This isn't social, this is your true view, all things considered, it's not what
you say publicly to incentivise people. It's the "what you really think"
question. Like, all the viewers need to turn oﬀ their BloggingHeads TV, and
then you can tell me what you really think and then turn it back on again.
Singer: --but we are on BloggingHeads TV, they haven't turned it oﬀ--
Cowen: --what would you say?
Singer: Look, if I'm talking to the 18 year old, and the 18 year old is saying "look, I
have these two career options. One is I do this, I confer all these beneﬁts by
developing cell phones but the end I end up pretty with my $200M and I don't
give it away, and the other is I earn the $40K/year and give away whatever
the percentage was", and we assume, as you said, the beneﬁts are much
less. So I'm going to tell the 18 year old to do the thing that will produce the
greatest beneﬁts. That's true. Even when he gets to 60 and he has the
$200M I'm still going to think, privately, that I gave him the right advice, that
was the right thing to do, I'm glad he did it. So if that's what you're asking
me, that will be my judgment, and in that sense he's a better person than he
would have been if he had just earned the $40K and given a lot of it away.
Cowen: You think a Utilitarian has to be a kind of Straussian and embrace certain
kinds of public lies to incentivise people?
Singer: I think that's a really interesting issue. Yeah, I would say he has to be a
Sidgwickian. I prefer being a Sidgwickian to a Straussian, just because
Straussians have a rather bad ﬂavor to it after they were used in the Bush
administration. You could say that the Iraq War conspiracy was kind of
Straussian. But, of course, Henry Sidgwick talked about that, he said that for
a Utilitarian it is sometimes going to be the case that you should do good, but
you need to do it secretly because if you talk publicly about what you're
doing this would set an example that would be misleading to others and
would lead to bad consequences. I think that's true, and I think for a
Utilitarian it's inevitable that there will sometimes be circumstances in which
that's the case.
 
What makes Peter Singer happy?

Cowen: Let me try another personal question, again feel free to pass. If you just ask
yourself, "what are the things in life that just make me, Peter Singer, happy",
what would you say they are? What's your own self account of what makes
you happy?
Singer: It's mixed. For example, I've been touring, talking about this book. I think the
book has the potential to do good in the world. I'm happy when I see that
people are responding to the book. Somebody told me last night at a dinner
that they'd read the book and they'd told an aid organization that they
support to ﬁnd a village where they could support the drilling of a well to
provide water and they were going to give whatever it took to drill that well.
That makes me happy, that I had this impact. Obviously I've had an impact
on people changing their diet too, I have people coming up to me all the time
saying "I read Animal Liberation and I became a vegetarian or a vegan and
I've been working for animal groups". That makes me happy too, that my
work has had that eﬀect, which I think it a beneﬁcial eﬀect. But I don't want
to pretend to you or to the BloggingHeads viewers that I'm a saint. I can be
happy when I'm on vacation, I can be hiking in the mountains. I love
mountain scenery, I had a vacation in Glacier National Park a year or so ago,
which was gorgeous. That sort of thing makes me happy, and I admit that it's
probably not doing as much good for the world as I could have done if
instead of spending the money on that vacation I had given it to Oxfam.
 
Human and animal pleasures
Cowen: I sometimes ask myself, I struggle with this question, I ask "are my own
deepest pleasures actually quite primeval ones", basically food, sleep, and
sex. In your own writings you've emphasized, correctly, the ties between
human beings and non-human animals, and it seems that for other animals
these are almost always, maybe always the deepest pleasures. So I tend to
think that for human beings, including ourselves, they're the deepest
pleasures as well, and the higher pleasures are worth something, but actually
they're somewhat of an epiphenomenon and what makes us happy are
similar to what make non-humans happy. Do you have a view on this?
Singer: I'm not sure I think that the things you mention ... food and sex are obviously
important, actually sleep doesn't make me particularly happy. It's something I
need to do or I feel bad, but It doesn't make me happy. But yeah, food and
sex are important pleasures in life. Are they more important in my life than
the things that I do in work? I wouldn't really say that. I think that food and
sex are the kind of desires that get satisﬁed: I eat a good meal, I enjoy it but I
don't want to eat again for a few hours, and even sex has its limits in how
much you can do at any particular time and still want more of it. Whereas the
kind of things we're talking about, you can call them "higher pleasures" or
"more purposive, fulﬁllment sort of activities" you can just go on and ﬁnd that
it's better and better. So I think there's a diﬀerence in that.
Cowen: So what makes you happy is pretty diﬀerent from what makes a non-human
animal happy, you would say?
Singer: Yes, that's true, I think higher cognitive capacities to make a diﬀerence there.
 
Pescatarianism

Cowen: Let me ask you a question about animal welfare. I have been very inﬂuenced
by a lot of what you've written, but I'm also not a pure vegetarian by any
means, and when it comes to morality, for instance, my view is that it's
perfectly ﬁne to eat ﬁsh. There may be practical reasons, like depleting the
oceans, that are an issue, but the mere act of killing and eating a ﬁsh I don't
ﬁnd anything wrong with. Do you have a view on this?
Singer: There's certainly, as you say, the environmental aspect, which is getting
pretty serious with a lot of ﬁsh stocks, but the other thing is there's no
humane killing of ﬁsh, right? If we buy commercially killed ﬁsh they have died
pretty horrible deaths. They've suﬀocated in nets or on the decks of ships, or
if they're deep sea ﬁsh pulled up by nets they've died of decompression,
basically their internal organs exploding as they're pulled up. I would really ...
I don't need to eat ﬁsh that badly that I need to do that to ﬁsh. If I was
hungry and nothing else to eat I would, perhaps, do it but not given the
choices I have.
Cowen: But now you're being much more the Jewish Moralist and less the Utilitarian.
Because the Utilitarian would look at the marginal impact and say "most ﬁsh
die horrible deaths anyway, of malnutrition or they're eaten or something
else terrible happens to them". The marginal impact of us killing them to me
seems to be basically zero. I'm not even sure a ﬁsh's life is happy, and why
not just say "it's ﬁne to eat ﬁsh"? Should it matter that we make them suﬀer?
It's a very non-Utilitarian way of thinking about it, a very moralizing
approach.
Singer: You would need to convince me that in fact they're going to die just as
horrible deaths in nature, and I'm not sure that that's true. Probably many of
them would get gobbled up by some other ﬁsh, and that's probably a lot
quicker than what we are doing to them.
Cowen: You have some good arguments against Malthusianism for human beings in
your book. My tendency is to think that ﬁsh are ruled by a Malthusian model,
and being eaten by another ﬁsh has to be painful. Maybe it's over quickly,
but having your organs burst as you're pulled up out of the water is probably
also pretty quick. I would again think that in marginal terms it doesn't matter,
but I'm more struck by the fact that it's not your ﬁrst instinct to view the
question in marginal terms. You view us as active agents and ask "are we
behaving in some manner which is moral, and you're imposing a non-
Utilitarian theory on our behavior. Is that something you're willing to
embrace, or something that was just a mistake?
Singer: Look, I think economists tend to think more in terms of marginal impact than
I do and you may be right that is something I may need to think about more.
Look, Tyler, I have to ﬁnish unfortunately, I've got another interview I've got
to go to, so it's been great talking to you, but I think we're going to have to
leave it at that point.
Cowen: Ok, thank you very much.
Singer: Thanks a lot.
Cowen: I've enjoyed it a great deal. Bye!
Singer: Ok, bye!
(I also posted this on my blog.)

The Quick Bayes Table
This is an eﬀort to make Bayes' Theorem available to people without heavy math
skills. It is possible that this has already been invented, because it is just a direct
result of expanding something I read at Yudkowsky's Intuitive Explanation of Bayes
Theorem. In that case, excuse me for reinventing the wheel. Also, English is my
second language.
When I read Yudkowsky's Intuitive Explanation of Bayes Theorem, the notion of using
decibels to measure the likelihood ratio of additional evidence struck me as extremely
intuitive. But in the article, the notion was just a little footnote, and I wanted to check
if this could be used to simplify the theorem.
It is harder to use logarithms than just using the Bayes Theorem the normal way, but I
remembered that before modern calculators were made, mathematics carried around
small tables of base 10 logarithms that saved them work in laborious multiplications
and divisions, and I wondered if we could use the same in order to get quick
approximations to Bayes' Theorem.
I calculated some numbers and produced this table in order to test my idea:
 
Decibels
Probability
Odds
-30
0.1%
1:1000
-24
0.4%
1:251
-20
1%
1:100
-18
1,5%
1:63
-15
3%
1:32
-12
6%
1:16
-11
7%
1:12.6
-10
9%
1:10
-9
11%
1:7.9
-8
14%
1:6.3
-7
17%
1:5
-6
20%
1:4
-5
24%
1:3.2
-4
28%
1:2.5
-3
33%
1:2
-2
38%
1:1.6
-1
44%
1:1.3
0
50%
1:1
+1
56%
1.3:1
+2
62%
1.6:1
+3
67%
2:1
+4
72%
2.5:1
+5
76%
3.2:1
+6
80%
4:1
+7
83%
5:1
+8
86%
6.3:1
+9
89%
7.9:1
+10
91%
10:1
+11
93%
12.6:1
+12
94%
16:1

+15
97%
32:1
+18
98.5%
63:1
+20
99%
100:1
+24
99.6%
251:1
+30
99.9%
1000:1
This table's values are approximate for easier use. The odds approximately double
every 3 dB (The real odds are 1.995:1 in 3 dB) and are multiplied by 10 every 10 dB
exactly.
In order to use this table, you must add the decibels results from the prior probability
(Using the probability column) and the likelihood ratio (Using the ratio column) in
order to get the approximated answer (Probability column of the decibel result). In
case of doubt between two rows, choose the closest to 0.
For example, let's try to solve the problem in Yudkowsky's article:
1% of women at age forty who participate in routine screening have breast cancer. 
80% of women with breast cancer will get positive mammographies.  9.6% of women
without breast cancer will also get positive mammographies.  A woman in this age
group had a positive mammography in a routine screening.  What is the probability
that she actually has breast cancer?
1% prior gets us -20 dB in the table. For the likelihood ratio, 80% true positive versus
9.6% false positive is about a 8:1 ratio, +9 dB in the table.  Adding both results, -20
dB + 9 dB = -11dB, and that translates into a 7% as the answer. The true answer is
7.9%, so this method managed to get close to the real answer with just a simple
addition.
--
Yudkowsky says that the likelihood ratio doesn't tell the whole story about the possible
results of a test, but I think we can use this method to get the rest of the story.
If you can get the positive likelihood ratio as the meaning of a positive result, then you
can use the negative likelihood ratio as the meaning of the negative result just
reworking the problem.
I'll use Yudkowsky's problem in order to explain myself. If 80% of women with breast
cancer get positive mammographies, then 20% of them will get negative
mammographies, and they will be false negatives. If 9.6% of women without breast
cancer get positive mammographies, then 90.4% of them will get negative
mammographies, true negatives.
The ratio between those two values will get us the meaning of a negative result: 20%
false negative versus 90.4% true negative is between 1:4 and 1:5 ratio. We get the
decibel value closest to 0, -6 dB. -20 dB - 6 dB = -26 dB. This value is between -24 dB
and -30 dB, so the answer will be between 0.1% and 0.4%. The true answer is 0.2%,
so it also works this way.
--
The positive likelihood ratio and the negative likelihood ratio are a good way of
describing how a certain test adds additional data. We could describe the

mammography test as a +9dB/-6dB test, and with only this information we know
everything we need to know about the test. If the result is positive, it adds 9dB to the
evidence, and if it is negative, it subtracts 6dB to it.
Simple and intuitive.
By the way, as decibels are used to measure physical quantities, not probabilities, I
believe that renaming the unit would be appropriate in this case. What about
DeciBayes?

A question about Eliezer
I blew through all of MoR in about 48 hours, and in an attempt to learn more about the
science and philosophy that Harry espouses, I've been reading the sequences and
Eliezer's posts on Less Wrong. Eliezer has written extensively about AI, rationality,
quantum physics, singularity research, etc. I have a question: how correct has he
been?  Has his interpretation of quantum physics predicted any subsequently-
observed phenomena?  Has his understanding of cognitive science and technology
allowed him to successfully anticipate the progress of AI research, or has he made any
signiﬁcant advances himself? Is he on the record predicting anything, either right or
wrong?   
Why is this important: when I read something written by Paul Krugman, I know that he
has a Nobel Prize in economics, and I know that he has the best track record of any
top pundit in the US in terms of making accurate predictions.  Meanwhile, I know that
Thomas Friedman is an idiot.  Based on this track record, I believe things written by
Krugman much more than I believe things written by Friedman.  But if I hadn't read
Friedman's writing from 2002-2006, then I wouldn't know how terribly wrong he has
been, and I would be too credulous about his claims.  
Similarly, reading Mike Darwin's predictions about the future of medicine was very
enlightening.  He was wrong about nearly everything.  So now I know to distrust
claims that he makes about the pace or extent of subsequent medical research.  
Has Eliezer oﬀered anything falsiﬁable, or put his reputation on the line in any way? 
"If X and Y don't happen by Z, then I have vastly overestimated the pace of AI
research, or I don't understand quantum physics as well as I think I do," etc etc.

