
Best of LessWrong: February 2017
1. Get Rich Slowly

Get Rich Slowly
On the last day of my MBA's ﬁnance class, the professor admitted that very few us are
ever going to use the formula for return-on-debt in our lives. Instead, for that class he
gave us a single sheet of paper titled "Bill's simple and suboptimal personal
investment guide" and explained his simple and suboptimal personal investment
strategy.
In the years since, I have not once used the formula for return-on-debt. I did, however,
use Bill's guide to set up my own investment account, and then one for my dad, and
for my girlfriend, and for a couple of friends... and now I'm going to do the same for
you.
A few disclaimers before we start:
1. I am not a certiﬁed investment advisor. In fact, I'm not a certiﬁed anything at all.
Don't sue me.
2. This guide is suboptimal. You can open your own brokerage account and
replicate the ETF structures to avoid the 0.15% Vanguard fees, but I'm not going
to tell how to do that because see point #1 above.
3. This guide is simple. A lot of people I know don't invest their money at all
because they think they entire universe of ﬁnance is beyond the grasp of mere
mortals. I am going to start with some very basic concepts, which it turns out
are all that is needed because investment isn't actually that complicated. If
you're familiar with the basics and agree that diversiﬁed index funds are the way
to go, you can skip the "Investment Basics" section and get to the second part
where I detail my personal investment strategy.
4. Personal gain disclaimer: Wealthfront is the main platform, along with Schwab,
that I use for investing my money. I'll explain the reasons for this choice later in
the post. Wealthfront isn't paying me for the endorsement (nor are they aware
of Putanumonit's existence) but the link is my own personal referral link. Clicking
it gives you a fee waiver for $15,000 and me a waiver for $5,000. Wealthfront's
fees are 0.25%, so if you use my link I get $12.5 (and a warm fuzzy feeling).
5. Both the platforms and investment types (e.g. a Roth IRA) I mention here are
speciﬁc to the United States. My global readers may be interested in the general
overview and the retirement spreadsheet, but they wouldn't be able to apply the
investment details.
Enough disclaiming. Let's get to the FAQing investments part, starting from square
one.
Investment Basics
Q: I don't get "investing". Why would anyone give me money just because I
already have some money?
The ﬁrst rule of money is that a dollar today is worth more than a dollar
tomorrow. That's because some people have ideas about taking a dollar today and
doing something proﬁtable with it. For example: a company could take your dollar,
buy an apple, polish it, and sell it for two dollars. If the company doesn't have the

original $1 to get the apple-polishing industry rolling, they will be willing to borrow it
from you for a share of proﬁts (i.e. stock) or a return of your $1 plus interest later (i.e.
bonds).
If you use your dollars to buy stocks and bonds, you're investing. If your dollars sit in
your checking account earning no interest, they're worth-less.
Q: Giving someone else my money sounds risky, what's up with that?
The second rule of money is that a safe dollar is worth more than a risky
dollar. This means that you get paid extra if someone wants to take your safe dollars
and do risky stuﬀ with them. Germany pays 0.3% interest on 10 year bonds because
there's a low risk of them defaulting on their debt or hyperinﬂating the Euro. Nigeria
pays 16% because Nigeria is riskier. If they oﬀered any less people would buy other
countries' bonds and not risk their cash there.
For stocks, the extra return on risk is implicit. Putanumonit Inc, an apple-polishing
conglomerate, has 100 shares outstanding so each share entitles you to 1% of the
company's proﬁts. If Putanumonit is expected to earn an average proﬁt of $50,000,
you'd think that a share should be worth $500. But unlike cash, the proﬁt isn't
guaranteed: it could be a lot more or a lot less. Every rationally risk-averse person
would prefer to own $500 in cash (safe) rather than 1% of the company (risky). To sell
shares, Putanumonit Inc would have to oﬀer them at a discount - perhaps $400 each.
If you buy the share and wait for the actual proﬁt to accrue, it will end up worth $500
on average and you'll earn a 25% return for tolerating the risk.
The rationality of risk-aversion is an important assumption for the risk-return tradeoﬀ.
There are many reasons for it, like the beneﬁts of predictability and psychological risk
aversion. The assumption doesn't hold all the time: people are willing to hold the
riskiest possible investment, a lottery ticket, for a whopping return of negative 50%.
But risk-aversion holds enough that on average, as investments are bought and sold
getting a high return usually requires accepting higher volatility and risk.
Q: Cool, so I can just do something crazy and risky with my money and it will
make a huge return?
Nope, risk in itself doesn't generate high returns, only risk that someone is willing to
pay you for, and someone will only pay you to hold risk that is otherwise unavoidable.
If you invest in Putanumonit Inc, you face many sources of risk: volatility in the price
of apples, the demand for polished fruit, the value of American dollars vs. other
currencies etc. The way to avoid speciﬁc risk is through diversiﬁcation.
For example, you could buy stock in an apple orchard to protect against surges in the
price of apples, or convert some of your dollars to World of Warcraft gold to hedge
against currency ﬂuctuations. By investing in more things that don't go up and down
in step with Putanumonit Inc, you face less volatility than if you just held a single
stock.
Some risk is impossible to diversify: when the ﬁnancial crisis hit in 2007-8 stocks and
bonds fell in every country and every category. Since smart investors will diversify
away the diversiﬁable risk, the remaining return on stocks and bonds should
compensate people for the unavoidable.
When the risks and returns of various investment portfolios are plotted on a chart,
there's an "eﬃcient frontier" beyond which portfolios can't improve. The frontier

represents the lowest possible risk for a given expected return, or the highest return
for a ﬁxed level of risk:
Q: Most investment portfolios are probably pretty close to the eﬃcient
frontier, right?
No, because people are stupid and don't diversify nearly enough. What a lot of people
don't realize is that your brokerage account isn't your only asset. Everything you own
is an investment, and so are your life and career. Many people also hold stock in the
company or sector they work in, because that's what they feel familiar with. But if
you're a programmer and you own tech stocks, your risk is doubled: when a tech
crash happens you lose your investments and your job.
The most common example of underdiversiﬁcation is home country bias: people tend
to buy stocks from their own country. If I live and work in the US my livelihood already
depends on the American economy doing well. If American companies tank and
Chinese companies ﬂourish, I'm not going to be able to learn Mandarin and get a job
in Chengdu. The most I can hope for is to be holding some Chinese stocks when that
happens.
Home country bias should be easier to avoid in 2017. Perhaps you thought it's safe to
invest in America: it's a stable democracy whose citizens prosper because free trade
allows them to specialize in high value jobs (like blogging) and talented immigrants
from around the world that keep the American economy vibrant and innovative. Then
America elects a crazy person who threatens democracy and the rule of law, wants to
dismantle free trade so Americans can go back to manufacturing t-shirts and growing
avocados, and who harasses and bans immigrants.
Now those Brazilian mining stocks don't sound so risky after all, do they?
It used to be prohibitively expensive to buy the stocks of thousands of companies in
every industry and corner of the world. Today it's practically free, with index
funds. Instead of having to personally track down each individual stock, a behemoth
like Vanguard does it just once (but with hundreds of billions) and you buy a piece of
the pie from Vanguard. The funds are cheap because the company creating them
doesn't make any decisions or analysis, they just buy a little bit of everything, which is
what you're looking for anyway.
People are investing more and more in index funds in recent years. What's unclear is
why some still don't.
Q: But owning a tiny piece of everything on the globe is boring!
Excitement while investing is usually a sign that you're losing money. Boring is
good. Average is good.
This is one of my absolute favorite quotes:
Same goes for investing. If we only wished to make the average market return, this
could be easily accomplished. But we wish to earn an above average return, and
that's impossible because of the eﬃcient market hypothesis.
Q: But that's just a hypothesis. Can't I earn better than market returns by
picking the best stocks?

No, you're not smart enough.
Q: Can't I earn better than market returns by picking a good fund?
No. Not only does the average mutual fund underperform the market in a given year,
the majority of them usually do. These mutual funds are run by guys and gals with
MBAs, and we're just not that smart. Even if you were super smart, you can't predict
which fund will do better or worse unless you have perfect information about their
investment strategies, which they'll never give you.
Did the  people in nice suits show you a strategy that beat the market by 50% last
year? That's because they didn't show you the other one they tried, the one that lost
by 55%. Did they beat the market 10 years in a row? They're probably running a
"reverse lottery strategy", one that has a high chance of a low positive return traded
oﬀ against a risk of complete annihilation. This is commonly known as picking pennies
in front of a steamroller, you can guess how those strategies end. Are they investing
based on the 17th monthly industrial lag?
There are very few hedge funds who consistently beat the market, but you can't
invest in them. These opportunities are rare and limited in scope, so only a limited
amount of money can be invested in them. It's easier to deal with a single investor
than a thousand, so the best funds usually accept only big sums from multi-
millionaires. It's even easier to have zero investors: the very best funds usually just
trade the founders' and employees' own money.
Having mad math skillz might be enough to get you hired into one of those, but
they're nowhere near enough to evaluate them from the outside. By the way: if my
readers know of a company in NYC that's looking for people with mad math skillz,
holla at your man.
Q: OK, can I earn worse than market returns?
Yes, people do it all the time! Mainly, by paying investment fees and taxes. Unlike
death, paying some tax is generally unavoidable. Investments fees, however, are
simply people stealing your money. Fortunately, robots aren't as greedy as people are
and will invest your money without stealing any of it. That's the main reason why I
invest with robo-advisors like Wealthfront and Schwab: they use simple robotic
algorithms to invest your money in broad index funds. Because they don't have to pay
the robots a salary, they don't charge you (signiﬁcant) fees.
The goal of the investment strategy I'll outline below is to achieve the average returns
of a maximally diversiﬁed portfolio while paying less taxes and as little fees as
possible. Point by point, this is what I actually do with my own money.
Get Rich Slowly - The Putanumonit Way
I make a middle-class American salary, and save more than a third of it.
There are two basic goals I want to accomplish by investing:
1. In the short term, have a bit more money whenever I need it than I would have
had if I left it in cash.
2. For the long term, never to run out of money until I die.

It may seem impossible to ﬁgure out how much money I'll use up for the rest of my
life, but we can put a num on it using this incredible spreadsheet that I put together in
half an hour. The spreadsheet simulates investing part of your income until retirement
(which then compounds), then drawing down from the investment after retirement.
Here's how to use it:
1. The spreadsheet has two tabs: "Fixed" and "Editable". In the second one the
values in the green cells can be changed to try out diﬀerent assumptions. In the
ﬁrst one they can't, so you can still see a reasonable worked example after
people mess up the second tab.
2. It's just a single Google doc and I have more than a single reader (hopefully), so
it's likely that several people will be playing with the editable tab at once. You
should be able to copy the sheet to your own Google doc or Excel and play with
the numbers privately.
3. All numbers are net of inﬂation, i.e. they're in 2017 dollars.
4. The goal of the game is to have a positive number in the "balance when you
die" cell. If the number is slightly high, your kids and loved ones get a nice
inheritance. If the number is negative, at some point in the future you'll be: A -
alive, B - broke, C - cursing the day you didn't heed the advice of my Google
doc. You have been warned.
The assumptions I made in the ﬁrst tab skew young and pessimistic, like I am. Two of
the cells are retirement year and years of life after retirement. With Social Security
running out but medicine improving, I would urge people to err high on both: assume
you'll retire at 75 and die at 115. Historically, US inﬂation has been around 3.3% and
stock market returns have been 7% for a net return of 3.7%. My assumption of 3.5%
could be pessimistic (if other countries will achieve high returns by catching up to the
US) or optimistic (if we're headed for a global stagnation), but it's the best I could
come up with. An inﬂation adjusted wage growth of 2.5% is also conservative.
Under those assumptions, you can see that even a person who starts saving 45 years
before they retire will need to put aside 30% of their salary. To simplify the model I
made the saving percentage constant, but a better idea is to save a large percent of
every increase in income. Thus - getting rich slowly.
I save most of my raises, and try to ﬁght lifestyle inﬂation.
My family moved to Israel with $16. After a long while, we were able to aﬀord a car
that was a decade older than me. After another long while we got such luxuries as a
TV. The funny thing is, I never felt growing up that we were poor. In fact, I felt just the
opposite. I felt rich because each year we were slightly but consistently richer than
the previous year. As long as you're not "http://putanumonit.com/2016/04/27/more-
power-less-poverty/">actually poor, the key to ﬁnancial happiness is to get richer
slowly and steadily.
In simpler terms: Happiness = Reality - Expectations, and your brain's money-
expectation is exactly  whatever you just spent last year. Spending a tiny bit more this
year than last year feels like living in luxury.
When we came to the US for business school, two of my Israeli classmates bought
new sports cars. I bought a bicycle for $150. They didn't live beyond their means:
both are talented and successful people who can aﬀord any car they want. It's just
that when you've had a Z5 it's hard to downgrade. When I got an internship and

traded my bike for a third-hand Toyota Yaris, I was as happy with the upgrade as my
classmates were with theirs.
Yes, even when it fell ﬂat
I'm doing well in an absolute sense, and a lifestyle increase of a mere 1-2% is more
than enough to feel really rich. Since my salary has been going up by a lot more than
that, I'm happy to invest most of my raises and by now I'm putting away roughly
35%-40% of the total salary.
I keep just enough in my checking account to cover ongoing expenses, and
invest the rest.
The investment platforms I mentioned can convert your index funds into cash and
send it to your bank account in 4-5 days, so you don't need to hold more cash than
you'd need on a 4 day notice. I keep about 50% more than my average monthly credit
card bill, so I can pay my cards on time with autopay. Any huge unexpected expense
can go on the credit card too, since I have at least 30 days to pay that back and have
more than enough time to withdraw the invested money if I need to.
If you expect a 7% return on stocks, you're losing $700 a year for every extra $10,000
you're keeping in a bank account.
Savings accounts are a scam
A "high yield" savings account gives you 1% interest, except that your money is
usually less ﬂexible than if you invested it in a fund. Every $10,000 you keep in a
savings account costs you $600 a year in lost yield, plus a headache. That $600 goes
to your bank, since it immediately turns around and invests your money for its own
proﬁts, at high yields.
I have a Roth IRA at Wealthfront,  a 401k at a mutual fund, and personal
accounts at Wealthfront and Schwab
Let's break down the platforms and the account types. Investment funds / brokers lie
on a scale from actively managed funds that pick and choose speciﬁc instruments to
automated robo-advisors that buy broad indices. The more selective a fund is, the less
it's diversiﬁed, which increases your risk. Since increasing your risk takes work, the
active funds charge you fees for the pleasure.
The three large robo-advisors in the USA are Wealthfront, Schwab and Betterment.
Betterment
Con: 0.25%-0.5% fees, otherwise same as the other ones.
Wealthfront
Pro: Can allocate >50% to international instruments and emerging markets.
Pro: Over 10% in municipal bonds, which are a good diversiﬁcation and aren't
taxed in the US.
Pro: Convenient dashboard that can show all your other investments in one
place.
Con: 0.25% fees above your ﬁrst $15,000, this cap can be lifted by inviting
friends.

Schwab
Pro: 0% fees.
Con: <40% international, <5% municipal bonds.
Con: 7-20% of your investment is held as cash.
The percent held in cash is the main reason I prefer Wealthfront to Schwab for all my
accounts except one. Cash holding is a hidden fee - if 10% of your investment is in
cash and you miss out on 7% returns while inﬂation eats away at it, you're paying
10%*7%=0.7% fees.
As for the portfolio allocation, I prefer to diversify away from the US but otherwise it's
hard to evaluate who gives you better deal. This decision can come down to personal
needs. For example, the high-yield portfolio at Wealthfront holds 16% in real estate
vs. 6% at Schwab. If you own a house, you already have too much of your net worth
tied in real estate and should prefer to diversify away from it. When you set up
a portfolio on either site they ask you a bunch of questions, such as whether you own
on rent a place to live, and adjust your allocation accordingly.
As for the diﬀerent investment accounts, they mainly diﬀer in the time horizon and
the taxes you pay on them:
Roth IRA
Pay income tax when you earn the money today, but no tax when you withdraw
it in the future.
Can withdraw after age 59.5, or for some non-discretionary spending (house,
medical bills, your kids' college).
Can invest only up to $5,500 per year.
401k
Pay income tax when you withdraw the money, but no tax when you earn it.
A bit less ﬂexible that Roth for non-discretionary emergencies, and also must
start withdrawing at age 70.
Personal investment
Pay income tax when you earn it, capital gains tax (currently 15%) when you
withdraw.
Use it whenever on whatever.
We'll get to each one in turn.
On January 1st, I put $5,500 in a Roth IRA account at the highest yield
portfolio at Wealthfront.
Let's break this down.
Why January 1st?
This is my highest-yield retirement investment, so I want to put the money in as early
as possible each year to accumulate the greatest return.
Why $5,500?

That's all I'm allowed.
Why a Roth IRA?
A choice between Roth IRA and a 401k mainly depends on whether you expect to pay
higher marginal income tax right now or when you're old. I expect my income tax to
increase over the next decades for personal reasons (I expect my income to grow)
and for Wagner's Law  reasons: taxes seem to grow inexorably in every advanced
economy. All the macroeconomic trends I see (aging population, increasing welfare,
automation of jobs) point to increasing income taxes as well.
I think it's good to have both types of accounts, so you have the ﬂexibility of using
401k money in low-spending low-tax years and Roth IRA money  when you ﬁnally buy
the ticket to Mars.
Why high-yield?
I don't plan on using this money for the next 30 years, so I hold it in the highest-yield /
highest-risk portfolio available to me: 90% stocks, a third of which are in emerging
markets which are riskier and more lucrative. The long time horizon lets the high
yields compound, while the high risks smooth out over time in accordance with the
law of large numbers.
Why Wealthfront?
Schwab holds a high percentage of cash, which can be overcome just by investing a
bit more and keeping less in your checking account. But since the Roth IRA has a hard
contribution limit, that's not an option. Since the IRA is high-yield, Every dollar of cash
in your IRA costs you a lot in forgone returns.
I put almost my entire bonus in my employer's 401k, and little else
otherwise.
Our 401k is with a mutual fund that charges an average of 1.6% fees, and we have no
choice about it. I swallow the fees because the spreadsheet tells me that the $5,500
in the IRA are nowhere near enough for a happy retirement. Of course, if your
employer matches 401k contributions you should max those out - that's free money.
I draw the 401k from my bonus for tax reasons. I pay income tax every two
weeks based on that period's prorated income. On the salary period when my bonus
arrives my income tax hits the highest bracket - around 20% more than my average
income tax. It takes more than a year to get that tax refunded, so if I paid the tax I
would be lending 20% of my money to Donald Trump at no interest, instead of making
7% return on it myself.
Keeping my hard earned cash away from the clutches of Donaeld the Unready is both
a duty and a privilege.
Once a month after I pay my credit card bills I invest the extra remaining
cash in personal accounts.
I have personal accounts at both Schwab and Wealthfront. The former is lower yield
(only 60% in stocks, mostly large cap) and holds 9% in cash, so it's the ﬁrst one I
would draw on for near-term expenses. The Wealthfront account is riskier since it's for
the medium term (~10 years) but a little more conservative than the Roth IRA.

The riskiness of the personal accounts should depend on your overall ﬁnancial
situation. I'm in good health, have no kids and a stable job. Whenever one of those
things changes, I will switch the portfolio to a lower risk allocation like 30% stocks -
70% bonds..
So there you have it. Some are people are unsatisﬁed with the average, and in
seeking to outsmart the average end up doing much worse. Others feel rich and
happy with their lot, and they let time and compound interest make them even richer.
And while you ponder the philosophical implications of that, there's still time to book
your Wealthfront Roth IRA investment for the 2016 tax year and keep your 2017
allowance.
Getting rich slowly takes time, best get started now.

