
Best of LessWrong: April 2016
1. Turning the Technical Crank

Turning the Technical Crank
A few months ago, Vaniver wrote a really long post speculating about potential futures
for Less Wrong, with a focus on the idea that the spread of the Less Wrong diaspora
has left the site weak and fragmented. I wasn't here for our high water mark, so I
don't really have an informed opinion on what has socially changed since then. But a
number of complaints are technical, and as an IT person, I thought I had some useful
things to say.
I argued at the time that many of the technical challenges of the diaspora were solved
problems, and that the solution was NNTP -- an ancient, yet still extant, discussion
protocol. I am something of a crank on the subject and didn't expect much of a
reception. I was pleasantly surprised by the 18 karma it generated, and tried to write
up a full post arguing the point.
I failed. I was trying to write a manifesto, didn't really know how to do it right, and
kept running into a vast inferential distance I couldn't seem to cross. I'm a product of a
prior age of the Internet, from before the http preﬁx assumed its imperial crown; I kept
wanting to say things that I knew would make no sense to anyone who came of age
this millennium. I got bogged down in irrelevant technical minutia about how to
implement features X, Y, and Z. Eventually I decided I was attacking the wrong
problem; I was thinking about 'how do I promote NNTP', when really I should have
been going after 'what would an ideal discussion platform look like and how does
NNTP get us there, if it does?'
So I'm going to go after that ﬁrst, and work on the inferential distance problem, and
then I'm going to talk about NNTP, and see where that goes and what could be done
better. I still believe it's the closest thing to a good, available technological schelling
point, but it's going to take a lot of words to get there from here, and I might change
my mind under persuasive argument. We'll see.
Fortunately, this is Less Wrong, and sequences are a thing here. This is the ﬁrst post in
an intended sequence on mechanisms of discussion. I know it's a bit oﬀ the beaten
track of Less Wrong subject matter. I posit that it's both relevant to our diﬃculties and
probably more useful and/or interesting than most of what comes through these days.
I just took the 2016 survey and it has a couple of sections on the eﬀects of the
diaspora, so I'm guessing it's on topic for meta purposes if not for site-subject
purposes.
Less Than Ideal Discussion
To solve a problem you must ﬁrst deﬁne it. Looking at the LessWrong 2.0 post, I see
the following technical problems, at a minimum; I'll edit this with suggestions from
comments.
1. Aggregation of posts. Our best authors have formed their own ﬁefdoms and their
work is not terribly visible here. We currently have limited support for this via the
sidebar, but that's it.
2. Aggregation of comments. You can see diaspora authors in the sidebar, but you
can't comment from here.

3. Aggregation of community. This sounds like a social problem but it isn't. You can
start a new blog, but unless you plan on also going out of your way to market it
then your chances of starting a discussion boil down to "hope it catches the
attention of Yvain or someone else similarly prominent in the community." Non-
prominent individuals can theoretically post here; yet this is the place we are
decrying as moribund.
4. Incomplete and poor curation. We currently do this via Promoted, badly, and via
the diaspora sidebar, also badly.
5. Pitiful interface feature set. This is not so much a Less Wrong-speciﬁc problem as
a 2010s-internet problem; people who inhabit SSC have probably seen me
respond to feature complaints with "they had something that did that in the 90s,
but nobody uses it." (my own bugbear is searching for comments by author-plus-
content).
6. Changes are hamstrung by the existing architecture, which gets you volunteer
reactions like this one.
I see these meta-technical problems:
1. Expertise is scarce. Few people are in a position to technically improve the site,
and those that are, have other demands on their time.
2. The Trivial Inconvenience Problem limits the scope of proposed changes to those
that are not inconvenient to commenters or authors.
3. Getting cooperation from diaspora authors is a coordination problem. Are we
better than average at handling those? I don't know.
Slightly Less Horrible Discussion
"Solving" community maintenance is a hard problem, but to the extent that pieces of
it can be solved technologically, the solution might include these ultra-high-level
elements:
1. Centralized from the user perspective. A reader should be able to interact with
the entire community in one place, and it should be recognizable as a
community.
2. Decentralized from the author perspective. Diaspora authors seem to like having
their own ﬁefdoms, and the social problem of "all the best posters went
elsewhere" can't be solved without their cooperation. Therefore any technical
solution must allow for it.
3. Proper division of labor. Scott Alexander probably should not have to concern
himself with user feature requests; that's not his comparative advantage and I'd
rather he spend his time inventing moral cosmologies. I suspect he would prefer
the same. The same goes for Eliezer Yudkowski or any of our still-writing-
elsewhere folks.
4. Really good moderation tools.
5. Easy entrance. New users should be able to join the discussion without a lot of
hassle. Old authors that want to return should be able to do so and, preferably,
bring their existing content with them.
6. Easy exit. Authors who don't like the way the community is heading should be
able to jump ship -- and, crucially, bring their content with them to their new
ship. Conveniently. This is essentially what has happened, except old content is
hostage here.
7. Separate policy and mechanism within the site architecture. Let this one pass for
now if you don't know what it means; it's the ﬁrst big inferential hurdle I need to

cross and I'll be starting soon enough.
As with the previous, I'll update this from the comments if necessary.
Getting There From Here
As I said at the start, I feel on ﬁrmer ground talking about technical issues than social
ones. But I have to acknowledge one strong social opinion: I believe the greatest
factor in Less Wrong's decline is the departure of our best authors for personal blogs.
Any plan for revitalization has to provide an improved substitute for a personal blog,
because that's where everyone seems to end up going. You need something that looks
and behaves like a blog to the author or casual readers, but integrates seamlessly into
a community discussion gateway.
I argue that this can be achieved. I argue that the technical challenges are solvable
and the inherent coordination problem is also solvable, provided the people involved
still have an interest in solving it.
And I argue that it can be done -- and done better than what we have now -- using
technology that has existed since the '90s.
I don't argue that this actually will be achieved in anything like the way I think it ought
to be. As mentioned up top, I am a crank, and I have no access whatsoever to
anybody with any community pull. My odds of pushing through this agenda are
basically nil. But we're all about crazy thought experiments, right?
This topic is something I've wanted to write about for a long time. Since it's not typical
Less Wrong fare, I'll take the karma on this post as a referendum on whether the
community would like to see it here.
Assuming there's interest, the sequence will look something like this (subject to
reorganization as I go along, since I'm pulling this from some lengthy but horribly
disorganized notes; in particular I might swap subsequences 2 and 3):
1. Technical Architecture
1. Your Web Browser Is Not Your Client
2. Specialized Protocols: or, NNTP and its Bastard Children
3. Moderation, Personal Gardens, and Public Parks
4. Content, Presentation, and the Division of Labor
5. The Proper Placement of User Features
6. Hard Things that are Suddenly Easy: or, what does client control gain us?
7. Your Web Browser Is Still Not Your Client (but you don't need to know that)
2. Meta-Technical Conﬂicts (or, obstacles to adoption)
1. Never Bet Against Convenience
2. Conﬂicting Commenter, Author, and Admin Preferences
3. Lipstick on the Conﬁguration Pig
4. Incremental Implementation and the Coordination Problem.
5. Lowering Barriers to Entry and Exit
3. Technical and Social Interoperability
1. Beneﬁts and Drawbacks of Standards
2. Input Formats and Quoting Conventions
3. Faking Functionality
4. Why Reddit Makes Me Cry

5. What NNTP Can't Do
4. Implementation of Nonstandard Features
1. Some desirable feature #1
2. Some desirable feature #2
3. ...etc. This subsequence is only necessary if someone actually wants to try
and do what I'm arguing for, which I think unlikely.
(Meta-meta: This post was written in Markdown, converted to HTML for posting using
Pandoc, and took around four hours to write. I can often be found lurking on
#lesswrong or #slatestarcodex on workday afternoons if anyone wants to discuss it,
but I don't promise to answer quickly because, well, workday)
[Edited to add: At +10/92% karma I ﬁgure continuing is probably worth it. After
reading comments I'm going to try to slim it down a lot from the outline above,
though. I still want to hit all those points but they probably don't all need a full post's
space. Note that I'm not Scott or Eliezer, I write like I bleed, so what I do post will likely
be spaced out]

