
Best of LessWrong: March 2017
1. I Want To Live In A Baugruppe

I Want To Live In A Baugruppe
Rationalists like to live in group houses.  We are also as a subculture moving more and
more into a child-having phase of our lives.  These things don't cooperate super well -
I live in a four bedroom house because we like having roommates and guests, but if
we have three kids and don't make them share we will in a few years have no spare
rooms at all.  This is frustrating in part because amenable roommates are incredibly
useful as alloparents if you value things like "going to the bathroom unaccompanied"
and "eating food without being screamed at", neither of which are reasonable "get a
friend to drive for ten minutes to spell me" situations.  Meanwhile there are also
people we like living around who don't want to cohabit with a small child, which is
completely reasonable, small children are not for everyone.
For this and other complaints ("househunting sucks", "I can't drive and need private
space but want friends accessible", whatever) the ideal solution seems to be
somewhere along the spectrum between "a street with a lot of rationalists living on it"
(no rationalist-friendly entity controls all those houses and it's easy for minor
ﬂuctuations to wreck the intentional community thing) and "a dorm" (sorta hard to get
access to those once you're out of college, usually not enough kitchens or space for
adult life).  There's a name for a thing halfway between those, at least in German -
"baugruppe" - buuuuut this would require community or sympathetic-individual
control of a space and the money to convert it if it's not already baugruppe-shaped.
Maybe if I complain about this in public a millionaire will step forward or we'll be able
to come up with a coherent enough vision to crowdfund it or something.  I think there
is easily enough demand for a couple of ten-to-twenty-adult baugruppen (one in the
east bay and one in the south bay) or even more/larger, if the structures materialized. 
Here are some bulleted lists.
Desiderata:
Units that it is really easy for people to communicate across and ﬂow between
during the day - to my mind this would be ideally to the point where a family
who had more kids than ﬁt in their unit could move the older ones into a kid unit
with some friends for permanent sleepover, but still easily supervise them.  The
units can be smaller and more modular the more this desideratum is
accomplished.
A pricing structure such that the gamut of rationalist ﬁnancial situations
(including but not limited to rent-payment-constraining things like "impoverished
app academy student", "frugal Google engineer eﬀective altruist", "NEET with a
Patreon", "CfAR staﬀperson", "not-even-ramen-proﬁtable entrepreneur", etc.)
could live there.  One thing I really like about my house is that Spouse can pay
for it himself and would by default anyway, and we can evaluate roommates
solely on their charming company (or contribution to childcare) even if their
ﬁnancial situation is "no".  However, this does require some serious participation
from people whose ﬁnancial situation is "yes" and a way to balance the two so
arbitrary numbers of charity cases don't bankrupt the project.
Variance in amenities suited to a mix of Soylent-eating restaurant-going takeout-
ordering folks who only need a fridge and a microwave and maybe a dishwasher,
and neighbors who are not that, ideally such that it's easy for the latter to feed
neighbors as convenient.

Some arrangement to get repairs done, ideally some compromise between "you
can't do anything to your living space, even paint your bedroom, because you
don't own the place and the landlord doesn't trust you" and "you have to
personally know how to ﬁx a toilet".
I bet if this were pulled oﬀ at all it would be pretty easy to have car-sharing
bundled in, like in Benton House That Was which had several people's personal
cars more or less borrowable at will.  (Benton House That Was may be
considered a sort of proof of concept of "20 rationalists living together" but I am
imagining fewer bunk beds in the baugruppe.)  Other things that could be
shared include longish-term storage and irregularly used appliances.
Dispute resolution plans and resident- and guest-vetting plans which thread the
needle between "have to ask a dozen people before you let your brother crash
on the couch, let alone a guest unit" and "cannot expel missing stairs".  I think
there are some rationalist community Facebook groups that have medium-trust
networks of the right caution level and experiment with ways to maintain them.
Obstacles:
Bikeshedding.  Not that it isn't reasonable to bikeshed a little about a would-be
permanent community ediﬁce that you can't beneﬁt from or won't beneﬁt from
much unless it has X trait - I sympathize with this entirely - but too much from
too many corners means no baugruppen go up at all even if everything goes
well, and that's already dicey enough, so please think hard on how necessary it
is for the place to be blue or whatever.
Location.  The only really viable place to do this for rationalist population critical
mass is the Bay Area, which has, uh, problems, with new construction.  Existing
structures are likely to be unsuited to the project both architecturally and
zoningwise, although I would not be wholly pessimistic about one of those little
two-story hotels with rooms that open to the outdoors or something like that.
Principal-agent problems.  I do not know how to build a dormpartment building
and probably neither do you.
Community norm development with buy-in and a good match for typical
conscientiousness levels even though we are rules-lawyery contrarians.
Please share this wherever rationalists may be looking; it's deﬁnitely the sort of thing
better done with more eyes on it.

