
Best of LessWrong: August 2017
1. Play in Hard Mode

Play in Hard Mode
Epistemic Status: Love the player, love the game
Also consider: Playing on Easy Mode
Raymond Arnold asked me, why do you insist on playing in hard mode?
Hard mode is harder. The reason to Play in Hard Mode is because it is the only known
way to become stronger, and to defend against Goodhart's Law.
Strategies that work in Easy Mode won't work in Hard Mode.
The key idea of Hard Mode is to keep your eyes on the prize. You know exactly what
you want. You can't munchkin your way to getting it. Once you start aiming to make a
number go up, or get a check in the right box, you have lost sight of the thing you
actually want. Proxy measures lead to failure; your value is fragile. That number
correlates to what you want, but only insofar as you're aiming for the goal and not the
number. If you break the spirit of the exercise, all is lost. Your values have been
hijacked. If you fail to develop skills along the way, you have missed the point,
because the game has no end.
I
Consider playing guitar in Rock Band. You must choose whether to play in Hard Mode.
If you do, you will fail a lot. You will play the same songs over and over again. Tricks
that rely on there only being so many notes, or going at a relaxed pace, collapse.
Eventually, you learn new techniques. You get better. You play on expert, your ﬁngers
get sore and you smile as you sing along.
II
You have a test in a week. You ignore it. You've asked questions based on your
curiosity, to resolve your confusion. You study what is interesting to you, and what you
feel would help you in the future.You focus on learning key principles, knowing you can
derive what details you need later on. When the test comes, you work to ﬁgure out
the answers. When you get the test back, you know how much you have learned. A
year later, you remember everything, and build upon it.
III
You prepare for a tournament. You seek out the toughest opponents to help you
prepare. You stop to criticize each other's technique and point out every little mistake,
no matter how irrelevant to the ultimate outcome of the practice match. You ask why
and how you made that mistake. You do the same when you learn something new in a
surprising way. You focus on the fundamentals, and don't worry too much about
exactly who you are up against this week. During the matches, you remember every
tough decision and every mistake, so you can train again next week.
IV
You start a website writing articles devoted to the things you care about. To monetize
it, you sell advertising through Google. It does not pay much at ﬁrst. You keep at it,

attracting a small but devoted readership. Some were already your friends, others
soon join them. You look at what resonates so you can get feedback, but are careful
not to take actions designed to maximize page views. Over time your writing improves
and you learn much together. A community of sorts arises. You don't quit your day job,
but you teach others what you have learned.
V
(Spoilers for the excellent Groundhog Day)
You are stuck in a small snowed-in town, caught in a time loop of unknown origin. At
ﬁrst you have fun doing absurd things, but then you buckle down. With unlimited time,
you decide to develop the skills and knowledge to give everyone a perfect day. You
learn to play the piano, you read great literature. You listen to and remember the
stories of everyone in town, and grow fond of them, learning what your opportunities
are to engage in small acts of kindness. At the end of the day, after suﬃcient
iterations*, you know you will be proud of your accomplishments, because you've
made yourself and the world better, and you just might impress the hell out of your
crush. If the loop continues*, you can do it again.
* - Results not guaranteed. You are unlikely to be in a movie. Local maxima may or
may not be suﬃcient.
Interlude!
 
VI
Your help your friends move. With time and practice, your group of friends gets quite
good and reliable. Any time, day or night, if someone needs to relocate, you'll all be
there, no questions asked. You call yourself the Midnight Movers. Most of your stuﬀ
arrives safely at its destination with a minimum of fuss, and you order everyone pizza.
Your group draws closer together, and eventually tries going into business together on
an unrelated matter.
VII
(Medium spoilers for The Good Place, highly recommended, skip this if you haven't
seen it yet)
You have an idea for a television show about a group of strangers who arrive in a
mysterious place that plays by very diﬀerent rules than our reality. You ﬁgure out
exactly how this place works, plot everything meticulously, and lay out mysteries for
the characters and viewers to uncover slowly over time. You use ﬂashbacks that
parallel events to examine and deepen the characters. Your production values are top
notch and you produce great television. Your show is not a smash hit, and you know
exactly where you are going with all this, so you don't waste a minute, keeping your
seasons short. In the end it all ﬁts together, and the journey was still pretty great on
second viewing.
VIII
Despite the terrible odds against you, you decide to strike out and open a ﬁne Italian
restaurant. Your dishes are sublime, but you soon learn that is but a small part of a

successful enterprise. You must hire quality staﬀ, arrange logistics across many
suppliers, draw in customers and much more. Each step of the way, while ruthlessly
keeping costs in check, you answer the question of what you would want your place to
be like, and evolve your menu to oﬀer a small selection of the best things you can
aﬀordably make. You get to know your customers by name. A casual observer would
think you almost dislike money, as you can barely tell from the outside that there is a
dining establishment there at all. Slowly word spreads among the cognoscenti, who
show up and order the wine. Business is good enough. You get to keep working on
perfecting your art.
IX
You have something to prove. To yourself.
Refuse to hire a cleaning service, ever, even though it's totally worth it.
Minimal applause lights.
Tell the job interviewer your true strengths and weaknesses. If they don't hire you, you
didn't want the job. Keep looking.
Find people to come to your meetup by promising them interesting intellectual
discussions and a community devoted to truth.
Refuse to pirate music, television, movies, software, even when the owners are being
kind of a dick and won't sell it to you.
When you are in power, respect and minority even when you have the votes, don't
change the rules to pass the laws you want. Strengthen free speech rules and don't
silence those you disagree with, lest they do the same to you.
Write carefully as you ﬁll out the forms. They might look like bureaucratic nonsense,
and no one is likely to ever read them, but you should get this straight and cultivate
good habits.
Learn to speak the language.
At your meetup, welcome challenges to in-group principles, so your group will be
viewed better and feel more welcoming to and attract more members who seek the
truth more than they demonstrate membership in the in-group.
Show other people what to do by example.
For demo day, you show what your system can do, and hope that you can keep
building it. For that you need funding.
X
Dismayed by terrible things, you devote your life to the promise of artiﬁcial general
intelligence. You discover that contrary to your initial beliefs, not only is creating AGI
not easy, most versions of it kill everyone and destroy all utility in the universe.
Explaining this is super hard. None of your explanations work. No one understands the
danger. You set out to teach the world rationality, hoping this will cause them to see
the potential dangers, with limited success. You write a book that's silly but gets you
exposure. You keep writing. Machine learning accomplishes more things and starts to

get more funding. People start to come around to AI being dangerous, but mostly for
the wrong reasons, so you don't expect anyone to take the right precautions, and fear
the world is doomed. You think that when they arrive, it will be far too late to correct
for safety problems later.
XI
You are at a meeting to arrange educational services for your son. You know that the
only thing that matters is what is written on the education plan. Whatever is in that
document is what will count. Still, you cannot let the numerous falsehoods and stupid
things pass, even though you realize that if you just play nice, they are going to put
down on the piece of paper the thing that you want on the piece of paper. If you keep
arguing, you risk getting nothing. Luckily, you think better of it in time. You go into
easy mode. They write the words you need on the piece of paper. You sign it. You walk
away happy.
In conclusion...

