
Best of LessWrong: February 2016
1. Require contributions in advance
2. Unoﬃcial Canon on Applied Rationality
3. The Brain Preservation Foundation's Small Mammalian Brain Prize won
4. Deﬁance
5. Conclusion of the Replacing Guilt series
6. Recklessness
7. How we will be measured

Require contributions in advance
If you are a person who ﬁnds it diﬃcult to tell "no" to their friends, this one weird trick
may save you a lot of time!
 
Scenario 1
Alice: "Hi Bob! You are a programmer, right?"
Bob: "Hi Alice! Yes, I am."
Alice: "I have this cool idea, but I need someone to help me. I am not good with
computers, and I need someone smart whom I could trust, so they wouldn't steal my
idea. Would you have a moment to listen to me?"
Alice explains to Bob her idea that would completely change the world. Well, at the
least the world of bicycle shopping.
Instead of having many shops for bicycles, there could be one huge e-shop that would
collect all the information about bicycles from all the existing shops. The customers
would specify what kind of a bike they want (and where they live), and the system
would ﬁnd all bikes that ﬁt the speciﬁcation, and display them ordered by lowest price,
including the price of delivery; then it would redirect them to the speciﬁc page of the
speciﬁc vendor. Customers would love to use this one website, instead of having to
visit multiple shops and compare. And the vendors would have to use this shop,
because that's where the customers would be. Taking a fraction of a percent from the
sales could make Alice (and also Bob, if he helps her) incredibly rich.
Bob is skeptical about it. The project suﬀers from the obvious chicken-and-egg
problem: without vendors already there, the customers will not come (and if they
come by accident, they will quickly leave, never to return again); and without
customers already there, there is no reason for the vendors to cooperate. There are a
few ways how to approach this problem, but the fact that Alice didn't even think about
it is a red ﬂag. She also has no idea who are the big players in the world of bicycle
selling; and generally she didn't do her homework. But after pointing out all these
objections, Alice still remains super enthusiastic about the project. She promises she
will take care about everything -- she just cannot write code, and she needs Bob's help
for this part.
Bob believes strongly in the division of labor, and that friends should help each other.
He considers Alice his friend, and he will likely need some help from her in the future.
Fact is, with perfect speciﬁcation, he could make the webpage in a week or two. But
he considers bicycles to be an extremely boring topic, so he wants to spend as little
time as possible on this project. Finally, he has an idea:
"Okay, Alice, I will make the website for you. But ﬁrst I need to know exactly how the
page will look like, so that I don't have to keep changing it over and over again. So
here is the homework for you -- take a pen and paper, and make a sketch of how
exactly the web will look like. All the dialogs, all the buttons. Don't forget logging in
and logging out, editing the customer proﬁle, and everything else that is necessary for
the website to work as intended. Just look at the papers and imagine that you are the

customer: where exactly would you click to register, and to ﬁnd the bicycle you want?
Same for the vendor. And possibly a site administrator. Also give me the list of criteria
people will use to ﬁnd the bike they want. Size, weight, color, radius of wheels, what
else? And when you have it all ready, I will make the ﬁrst version of the website. But
until then, I am not writing any code."
Alice leaves, satisﬁed with the outcome.
 
This happened a year ago.
No, Alice doesn't have the design ready, yet. Once in a while, when she meets Bob,
she smiles at him and apologizes that she didn't have the time to start working on the
design. Bob smiles back and says it's okay, he'll wait. Then they change the topic.
 
Scenario 2
Cyril: "Hi Diana! You speak Spanish, right?"
Diana: "Hi Cyril! Yes, I do."
Cyril: "You know, I think Spanish is the most cool language ever, and I would really
love to learn it! Could you please give me some Spanish lessons, once in a while? I
totally want to become ﬂuent in Spanish, so I could travel to Spanish-speaking
countries and experience their culture and food. Would you please help me?"
Diana is happy that someone takes interest in her favorite hobby. It would be nice to
have someone around she could practice Spanish conversation with. The ﬁrst instinct
is to say yes.
But then she remembers (she knows Cyril for some time; they have a lot of friends in
common, so they meet quite regularly) that Cyril is always super enthusiastic about
something he is totally going to do... but when she meets him next time, he is super
enthusiastic about something completely diﬀerent; and she never heard about him
doing anything serious about his previous dreams.
Also, Cyril seems to seriously underestimate how much time does it take to learn a
foreign language ﬂuently. Some lessons, once in a while will not do it. He also needs to
study on his own. Preferably every day, but twice a week is probably a minimum, if he
hopes to speak the language ﬂuently within a year. Diana would be happy to teach
someone Spanish, but not if her eﬀort will most likely be wasted.
Diana: "Cyril, there is this great website called Duolingo, where you can learn Spanish
online completely free. If you give it about ten minutes every day, maybe after a few
months you will be able to speak ﬂuently. And anytime we meet, we can practice the
vocabulary you have already learned."
This would be the best option for Diana. No work, and another opportunity to practice.
But Cyril insists:
"It's not the same without the live teacher. When I read something from the textbook,
I cannot ask additional questions. The words that are taught are often unrelated to the

topics I am interested in. I am afraid I will just get stuck with the... whatever was the
website that you mentioned."
For Diana this feels like a red ﬂag. Sure, textbooks are not optimal. They contain many
words that the student will not use frequently, and will soon forget them. On the other
hand, the grammar is always useful; and Diana doesn't want to waste her time
explaining the basic grammar that any textbook could explain instead. If Cyril learns
the grammar and some basic vocabulary, then she can teach him all the specialized
vocabulary he is interested in. But now it feels like Cyril wants to avoid all work. She
has to draw a line:
"Cyril, this is the address of the website." She takes his notebook and writes
'www.duolingo.com'. "You register there, choose Spanish, and click on the ﬁrst lesson.
It is interactive, and it will not take you more than ten minutes. If you get stuck there,
write here what exactly it was that you didn't understand; I will explain it when we
meet. If there is no problem, continue with the second lesson, and so on. When we
meet next time, tell me which lessons you have completed, and we will talk about
them. Okay?"
Cyril nods reluctantly.
 
This happened a year ago.
Cyril and Diana have met repeatedly during the year, but Cyril never brought up the
topic of Spanish language again.
 
Scenario 3
Erika: "Filip, would you give me a massage?"
Filip: "Yeah, sure. The lotion is in the next room; bring it to me!"
Erika brings the massage lotion and lies on the bed. Filip massages her back. Then
they make out and have sex.
 
This happened a year ago. Erika and Filip are still a happy couple.
Filip's previous relationships didn't work well, in long term. In retrospect, they all
followed a similar scenario. At the beginning, everything seemed great. Then at some
moment the girl started acting... unreasonably?... asking Filip to do various things for
her, and then acting annoyed when Filip did exactly what he was asked to do. This
happened more and more frequently, and at some moment she broke up with him.
Sometimes she provided explanation for breaking up that Filip was unable to decipher.
Filip has a friend who is a successful salesman. Successful both professionally and
with women. When Filip admitted to himself that he is unable to solve the problem on
his own, he asked his friend for advice.
"It's because you're a f***ing doormat," said the friend. "The moment a woman asks
you to do anything, you immediately jump and do it, like a well-trained puppy. Puppies

are cute, but not attractive. Have you ready any of those books I sent you, like, ten
years ago? I bet you didn't. Well, it's all there."
Filip sighed: "Look, I'm not trying to become a pick-up artist. Or a salesman. Or
anything. No oﬀense, but I'm not like you, personality-wise, I never have been, and I
don't want to become your - or anyone else's - copy. Even if it would mean greater
success in anything. I prefer to treat other people just like I would want them to treat
me. Most people reciprocate nice behavior; and those who don't, well, I avoid them as
much as possible. This works well with my friends. It also works with the girls... at the
beginning... but then somehow... uhm... Anyway, all your books are about
manipulating people, which is ethically unacceptable for me. Isn't there some other
way?"
"All human interaction is manipulation; the choice is between doing it right or wrong,
acting consciously or driven by your old habits..." started the friend, but then he gave
up. "Okay, I see you're not interested. Just let me show you the most obvious mistake
you make. You believe that when you are nice to people, they will perceive you as
nice, and most of them will reciprocate. And when you act like an asshole, it's the
other way round. That's correct, on some level; and in a perfect world this would be
the whole truth. But on a diﬀerent level, people also perceive nice behavior as
weakness; especially if you do it habitually, as if you don't have any other option. And
being an asshole obviously signals strength: you are not afraid to make other people
angry. Also, in long term, people become used to your behavior, good or bad. The nice
people don't seem so nice anymore, but they still seem weak. Then, ironicaly, if the
person well-known to be nice refuses to do something once, people become really
angry, because their expectations were violated. And if the asshole decides to do
something nice once, they will praise him, because he surprised them pleasantly. You
should be an asshole once in a while, to make people see that you have a choice, so
they won't take your niceness for granted. Or if your girlfriend wants something from
you, sometimes just say no, even if you could have done it. She will respect you more,
and then she will enjoy more the things you do for her."
Filip: "Well, I... probably couldn't do that. I mean, what you say seems to make sense,
however much I hate to admit it. But I can't imagine doing it myself, especially to a
person I love. It's just... uhm... wrong."
"Then, I guess, the very least you could do is to ask her to do something for you ﬁrst.
Even if it's symbolic, that doesn't matter; human relationships are mostly about role-
playing anyway. Don't jump immediately when you are told to; always make her jump
ﬁrst, if only a little. That will demonstrate strength without hurting anyone. Could you
do that?"
Filip wasn't sure, but at the next opportunity he tried it, and it worked. And it kept
working. Maybe it was all just a coincidence, maybe it was a placebo eﬀect, but Filip
doesn't mind. At ﬁrst it felt kinda artiﬁcial, but then it became natural. And later, to his
surprise, Filip realized that practicing these symbolic demands actually makes it easier
to ask when he really needed something. (In which case sometimes he was asked to
do something ﬁrst, because his girlfriend -- knowingly or not? he never had the
courage to ask -- copied the pattern; or maybe she has already known it long before.
But he didn't mind that either.)
 

The lesson is: If you ﬁnd yourself repeatedly in situations where people ask you to do
something for them, but at the end they don't seem to appreciate what you did for
them, or don't even care about the thing they asked you to do... and yet you ﬁnd it
diﬃcult to say "no"... ask them to contribute to the project ﬁrst.
This will help you get rid of the projects they don't care about (including the ones they
think they care about in far mode, but do not care about enough to actually work on
them in near mode) without being the one who refuses cooperation. Also, the act of
asking the other person to contribute, after being asked to do something for them,
mitigates the status loss inherent in working for them.

Unoﬃcial Canon on Applied
Rationality
I have been thinking for a while that it would be useful if there was something similar
to the Less Wrong Canon on Rationality for the CFAR material. Maybe, it could be
called the 'CFAR Canon on Applied Rationality'. To start on this I have compiled a
collection of descriptions for the CFAR techniques that I could ﬁnd. I have separated
the techniques into a few diﬀerent sections. The sections and descriptions have
mostly been written by me, with a lot of borrowing from other material, which means
that they may not accurately reﬂect what CFAR actually teaches.
Please note that I have not attended any CFAR workshops, nor am I aﬃliated with
CFAR in any way. My understanding of these techniques comes from CFAR videos,
blogs and other websites which I have provided links to. If I have missed any
important techniques or if my understanding of any of the techniques is incorrect or if
you can provide links to the research that these techniques are based on, please let
me know and I will update this post. 
Warning:
Learning this material based solely on the descriptions written here may be unhelpful,
arduous or even harmful. (See Duncan_Sabien's full comment for more information on
this) It is because the material is very hard to learn correctly. Most of the techniques
below involve in one way or another volitionally overriding your instinctual, intuitive or
ingrained behaviours and thoughts. These are thoughts which not only often feel
enticing and alluring, but that also often feel unmistakably right. If you are anything
like me, then you should be very careful if you are trying to learn this material alone.
For you will be prone to rationalization,  taking shortcuts and making mistakes.
My recommendations for trying to learn this material are:
learn it deeply and be sure to put what you have learnt into practice. It will often
help if you take notes on what works for you and what doesn't. Also take note of
the 'Mindsets and perspectives that help you in discovering potential situations
that you could end up valuing' section as these are very important.
get the help of experts or other people who have already expended great
amounts of eﬀort in trying to implement this material like the people at cfar. This
will save you a great amount of stress and eﬀort as it will allow you to avoid a
plethora of potential mistakes and ineﬃciencies. If you really want to learn this
material, then you should deeply consider attending a CFAR workshop. 
get the help of or involve friends. As Duncan_Sabien has said:
It is better on almost every axis with instructors, mentors, friends,
companions—people to help you avoid the biggest pitfalls, help you
understand the subtle points, tease apart the interesting implications, shore
up your motivation, assist you in seeing your own mistakes and weaknesses.
None of that is impossible on your own, but it's somewhere between one and
two orders of magnitude more eﬃcient and more eﬃcacious with guidance".
be dubious of your mental models. Beware thoughts and ideas that feel
unequivocally right especially if they are solely located internally rather than
also being expressed or formulated externally. 

You might want to bookmark this page instead of reading it all at once as it is
quite long.
Sections:
Bugs
Discovering bugs
Things that are probably bugs and should be analysed
Analyzing bugs
Solving bugs
Mindsets and perspectives that help you in discovering potential situations that
you could end up valuing
Optimizing your ability to follow through with your plans
Learning optimization
Planning optimization
Improving the accuracy of your credence levels
Mindfulness of how your internal state is aﬀecting how you perceive the world
Resolving Disagreements
Other stuﬀ which has already been covered in LessWrong
Bugs
An important concept that is required to understand the CFAR material is the concept
of 'bugs'. Bugs generally tend to be situations that involve a feeling of "stuckness"
and often occur when your system one and two wants are out of alignment. Some
concrete examples of bugs include: 
things that aren't working and you don't know why, e.g. repeatedly not getting
things done on time or always having issues with your ﬁnished products at work
things that just don't feel right, e.g. your daily schedule or personal relationships
things that you want to do, but also don't want to do, e.g. exercise or doing your
taxes
things you want to improve and don't know how to, e.g. getting a good night's
sleep or social skills
things that you want to do, but are afraid to do, e.g. public speaking
plans you think are going to fail, e.g. getting your class assignment in on time
other dissatisfactions and ineﬃciencies
various other internal conﬂicts
CFAR would stress that 'bugs' are not things that should be accepted with resignation.
They are instead things that should be worked through and solved. They are problems
that deserve your time, attention and courage to solve. Due to our human nature, it is
often best to get the help of others when you are trying to solve your bugs as we tend
to rationalize and justify our bugs.
In summary,  the CFAR perspective on bugs seems to be that when you notice one
you should think: "Okay! Here is an opportunity for me to get better at life. Where's
my pen and paper?" or "Where can I ﬁnd someone to talk this through with". 
Discovering bugs - the below techniques all deal, in one way or another, with
improving your ability to be able to discover your bugs.
Hamming questions - the mathematician Richard Hamming was known to
approach experts from other ﬁelds and ask "what are the important problems in

your ﬁeld, and why aren't you working on them?". The same question can be
applied to personal life: "what are the important problems in your life and what
is stopping you from working on them?" This question is often best asked in
what for convenience is often called a "hamming circle". This is a group of
people who come together and help each other explore their hamming
questions. As a word of caution, jimrandomh has advised that:
If you organize a group into Hamming Circles and they don't know what
they're doing, aren't in the right mindspace, or don't have enough shared
context and trust, it can backﬁre pretty severely. People's Hamming
problems are often things that are aversive to think about, and attempting
to discuss them but having it go poorly can make the problem worse.
The Surprise Journal - is a simple technique which involves recording when and
why you are surprised. Surprise is a cue that your expectations are and were
wrong. Part of the usefulness of this technique may be that it primes the
reticular activation system so that you are on the lookout for and notice the
things that surprise you.
Comfort Zone Expansion (CoZE) - is basically CFAR's take on exposure therapy.
Now, most people don't have full on debilitating disorders, but it is common for
people to accumulate some negative, avoidant or escape-oriented strategies.
Some example situations in which these strategies tend to occur can be found
here. These strategies tend to form for a large number of reasons, but the most
common is probably due to our human brains being bad at evaluating the
negative social impacts and consequences of our actions. This is due to the
negativity bias, as well as other things. CoZE is a way to ﬁx these strategies. It
could be described as a long-term method to better calibrate your evaluations or
also as applied aversion factoring. There are two main goals involved in it. The
ﬁrst is to train yourself to be able to do things that you ﬁnd aversive, i.e. to be
able to feel the fear and do it anyway. The second is to remove or lessen your
non helpful aversions. These two goals are entwined as the idea of CoZE is to
frequently expose you to the aversive thing (in a safe way) and to make sure
you do it despite the discomfort. The idea is that this will help you to realize that
it is not as bad as you predict. Some tips if you are going to try CoZE are: ﬁnd
some way to involve others either as an audience or as a way to provide
accountability, care simply about getting what you want to do done rather than
getting it done well or with good results and try to cultivate a culture or sense of
playfulness as this leads to better coping styles for dealing with stress. CoZE
involves:
Creating a list of doable, but also challenging situations that are outside
your comfort zone, but not by so much that they are going to cause
trauma or any other long term negative eﬀects.
Noting down the diﬃculty of the task in accordance with your comfort
zone. The diﬃculty of a task is dependent on the individual. A lawyer might
have no diﬃculties with social situations, but could ﬁnd situations involving
heights to be extremely diﬃcult. Another person might be the exact
opposite.
Doing the aversive thing. It is good idea to view the discomfort as a part of
the growth experience. If it is uncomfortable, then it means that you are
extending yourself and what you are capable of. The discomfort is the price
you pay for advancing towards a goal.
Note down or think about whether the real consequences matched up with
your predictions. Even if you do something that turns out to genuinely
dangerous or harmful, then this is good (as long as you are ﬁne) as it has

provided you with some reasonably trustworthy information that you
should avoid the thing you just did or at least adapt your strategies with
engaging with it.
Directed graphical causal models for our personal lives - this modelling process,
which probably happens more naturally for some of us than others, can help us
focus locally on relevant causal relationships, and generate queries about them
that we might otherwise forget to seriously ask.
Value of information and fermi-type estimation in daily life - an example of this is
asking: "how many minutes will I spend commuting over the next year and
what's the expected savings if I set a 5-minute timer to try to optimize that?"
The basic idea is that you are trying to ﬁnd valuable information that would
allow you to estimate or improve the value of some large and expensive (or
frequent) task that you plan to do in the future. For example, many people
commit to years of education and tens of thousands of hours of work to "get a
good job doing X" without even spending as little as 40 hours job-shadowing to
see if they'd actually enjoy doing X, or 10 hours cleverly searching for
alternative lines of work. 
Things that are probably bugs and should be analysed - the below are not
really techniques, but are instead descriptions of particular situations that frequently
turn out to be bugs. 
Alienated birth rights - these are things that all human beings should be capable
of engaging in and enjoying, but which people often do not because of
internalized beliefs and identities that say things like: "I cannot do that" or "I am
bad at that". (This is similar to learned blankness and learned helplessness)
Half-hearted trying often induces failure and is rarely the optimal behaviour (this
is my interpretation of the material in this post) - 'half-hearted trying' could be
described as either handicapping or self-limiting behaviour as well as when you
are just going through the motions rather than fully applying yourself. Half-
hearted trying is a common response when someone is apathetic or predicting
that failure is inevitable, or at least highly probable. It is diﬀerent from cautious,
tentative and exploratory behaviours. Half-hearted trying isn't necessarily a bad
thing. It is often totally ﬁne to be doing it and you shouldn't view it as anything
more than an indication that you don't really care about what you are doing. You
shouldn't feel guilty when you notice that you are half-heartedly trying. In fact,
ﬁnding this out should be a cause for celebration as it means that you have just
found a new reliable source of information into your true motivations. This new
information can then be used to debug why you are half-heartedly trying.
Successful debugging will generally lead to four types of situations. If you ﬁnd
out that what you are half-heartedly trying to do is something that you shouldn't
care about, then you should spend some time and eﬀort to ﬁnd out if it's
possible to stop doing it. If you ﬁnd out that it is something that you should
really be caring about more, then you have found a bug that you should solve. If
you ﬁnd out that you are handicapping yourself because you fear failure, then
you should try to remove these fears or aversions, see the 'Taking apart your
aversions' section for more on this. Finally, if you ﬁnd out that it is something
that you need to do, but shouldn't care about, then you should try to accept
your half-hearted trying. You should not  punish yourself for half-heartedly trying
because, at the end of the day, even if you are doing something half-heartedly
at least you are doing it. As kurt Vonnegut once wrote: "If you can do a half-
assed job of anything, you're a one-eyed man in a kingdom of the blind".
Perhaps, we should only concern ourselves over those tasks that we repeatedly
ﬁnd ourselves half-heartedly trying to do. We should beware of the fact that

callousness and apathy often come easily. Consistently caring, on the other
hand, can require great amounts of character and courage. Some examples of
half-heartedly trying include when:
Your goal is just to get something done rather than to get it done well. For
example, someone might be nagging you to do something and so you
reluctantly and half-heartedly do it.
You ﬁnd something to be pointless, but are unable to stop doing it. For
example, you might be in a relationship that you no longer want to be in,
but you don't have the courage to break it up, so you withdraw
physcially/emotionally and continue the relationship, but are only half-
commited to it.
You ﬁnd that it makes failure more palatable or less socially costly. For
example, if you do end up failing you like the idea that you can always say:
"Oh, yeh, but I wasn't really trying"
You highly value giving up early in certain contexts. For example, beginner
parkour students often do not do certain moves well because it is easy to
quit early in them.
You ﬁnd some aspect of the activity to be aversive, but you still want to do
it. For example, you might feel guility about doing something, so you end
up only half committing to doing it.
Remove wasteful and/or harmful repeated thoughts (this is my interpretation of
the material in this post) - rumination and dwelling is a very human way of
solving complex problems, but ruminations are expensive and can also alter us
in signiﬁcant ways. It is therefore important that you make sure that your
ruminations are directed at worthy and solvable problems. Some diﬀerent types
of problems that we ruminate about include:
Problems that System 1 can solve by itself : these are good leave them
alone
Problems that are worth solving, but require System 2 input : this would
include repeated behaviours that you dislike. For example, feeling stuck in
a job or relationship, but doing nothing about it. The solution here is
to raise the problem to conscious attention and then try to ﬁgure out what
is bothering system 1. You should then decide on what to do about it. 
"Problems" that should be accepted : consider someone who is making an
annoying munching sound. Most people would think in their heads: "will
you shutup" or something similar. These negative thoughts do nothing to
change the actual situation. The best thing to do in this situation is to
decide on a strategy to either stop the aggravation or to accept it and stop
dwelling negatively on it.
Problems that should be delegated either to others or to future you :
simply put, if dwelling on something is not helpful in anyway then it should
be stopped. For example, if on the way home after an interview you are
thinking about all the things that you might have messed up then you are
eﬀectively causing yourself stress for no reason. This is because there is no
way for you to take actions on these thoughts. You cannot retake the
interview and so you shouldn't worry about what might have gone wrong.
It is ok to take notes on areas to improve. It is a problem, however, when
you dwell on these areas outside of situations where you can take actions
to improve in them. In the same way if you are dwelling on something that
others must do or that you can only do in the future then these thoughts
are eﬀectively wasteful.
Problems that require dwelling or rumination to solve : examples include
complex academic problems that you are trying to solve. Rumination and
dwelling in this case is useful and you should let it be.

Analyzing bugs - these techniques are all about helping you to better understand
what you actually value or ﬁnd aversive
Goal factoring - this entails ﬁnding some alternate set of actions through which
you could get what you want cheaper. For instance, if you believe that you are
doing martial arts solely for the exercise and self-defense beneﬁts, but do not
want to get these things by, for example, jogging to work and carrying mace,
then it indicates that there is something more to your positive evaluation of
martial arts. You might, for example, want to do it because you think it's cool or
because your friends do it. By listening to your emotional reactions and
analyzing them you can ﬁnd out how to better align your evaluations so that you
end up correctly valuing what you actually ﬁnd valuable.
Reference class hopping - while reference class forecasting is about improving
your reference class so that you can make more accurate predictions. Reference
class hopping is about discovering the underlying cause of anxiety or akrasia. It
does this by exploring diﬀerent reference classes and tests them to ﬁnd out if
they arouse anxiety or akrasia. For example, imagine that you dislike social
gatherings. Reference class hopping would tell you to look at your track record
to consider whether you feel anxious at all parties or whether there are times
when the anxiety is diminished. By identifying the common themes in the
parties that you ﬁnd uncomfortable, you can develop a hypothesis about the
source of your anxiety and then test the theory.
Solving bugs
Taking apart your aversions or aversion factoring - involves:
Finding a task that you ﬁnd aversive, but think might be worthwhile doing
Attempting to list the complete set of aversions, i.e. everything that is
stopping you from doing the task
Making each aversion concrete, i.e. ﬁnding out what exactly, at the
smallest level possible, is aversive. We often think of aversions in the
conglomerate sense. We think "I don't like social gatherings" instead of "I
don't like aspect X of social gatherings". The problem with this is that it
leads us to ﬁnd things in their entirety to be aversive when it might really
only be one aspect of it that we ﬁnd to be aversive.
Solving your aversions. The strategy that you take here will depend on the
type of aversion that it is. We can think of aversions as being one of two
types: helpful and non helpful.
A helpful aversion is one where you would think: "Oh, thanks brain
for helping me avoid that harmful situation". Aversions of this type
should either be accepted or solved by generating procedures or
techniques that eradicate the danger or potentially harmful situation.
Once the aversion is solved it may still linger, which means it has
turned into a non helpful aversion. 
A non helpful aversion is one that is present when there is no danger
or reason for its existence. Aversions tend to be sticky and residual
which means that people's aversions often prompted helpful
behaviors in the past, but since their environment has changed they
have now become unhelpful. The goal in this step is to simply
develop a plan that will help to remove these aversions. Often this
will involve acclimation or exposure. Reframing can also help. Also,
see the section: "optimising your ability to follow through with your
plans"

Doing a mindful walk through of the activity that was originally aversive to
see if it is still aversive. If it is, then repeat this process from step 2.
Reframing - when making decisions the underlying valuation of a solution or
problem depends on the perspective or way in which you are framing the
solution or problem. For example, instead of thinking "Do I want to go the gym?"
you can think "If I was already at the gym, would I want to leave and wish that I
hadn't gone?"
Pitting your desire to look good against your desire to improve - if you are going
to improve fast, then you will probably also need to fail fast and fail frequently,
at least at ﬁrst. You will need to be doing things like: asking 'silly' questions or
trying stuﬀ out even when you're not ready. This can be hard to do because no
one likes to look like a fool. One technique that sometimes helps in making this
easier is to to compare your desire to not look like a fool now vs. your desire to
become better.
While one person hesitates because he feels inferior, the other is busy
making mistakes and becoming superior
Focused Grit - this basically involves sitting down, focusing and giving a problem
your full attention for at least ﬁve minutes. A surprising number of problems can
be solved in just ﬁve minutes. The whole process is:
Take a piece of paper, a pen and a timer
Identify a large problem, e.g. terrible job, family feud
Think about the problem for ﬁve whole minutes, by the clock
If the problem has not been resolved and you know of another 5 minute
exercise that you could try, restart this process from step 1 with this
exercise.
If the problem has not been resolved and you do not know of another 5
minute exercise you could try, spend 5 minutes brainstorming potential 5
minute exercises that could potentially solve the problem. If you come up
with an exercise, restart this process from step 1. 
Mindsets and perspectives that help you in discovering potential situations
that you could end up valuing
Self eﬃcacy - this is the sense that you can tackle any given problem. It is the
idea that there is always a way in which to do something and that you just need
to ﬁnd it
Growth mindset - this is the belief that you are always capable of being more
than you currently are. A growth mindset does not necessarily involve positive
thinking. For example, if you repeat the aﬃrmation 'I am a great singer'. This
can actually have a negative eﬀect. Because the aﬃrmation relates to a ﬁxed
attribute and if your brain doesn't feel it to be true, then it is likely to activate
the exact opposite concept, i.e. that you are a bad singer. Another potential
negative eﬀect of positive thinking is the "goal-turnoﬀ eﬀect" which means that
once a pursuit attempt has been completed the goal deactivates and inhibits the
mental representations used to attain the goal. 
Mental contrasting - is a technique can be used as an alternative to positive
thinking and has been shown to be useful. Mental contrasting is a visualization
technique where you imagine several positive aspects of completing your goal
and then look at your current situation and the obstacles that are stopping you
from completing the goal. To work well mental contrasting requires a growth
mindset and a reasonable expectation of success. This is because if you do it

with a ﬁxed or negative assessment of yourself then it will only deepen and
reinforce this assessment.
A feeling that you should keep trying new things - a big part of this is being
willing to embrace the new and uncertain in the hope that it will lead to
something useful. This involves taking on a new perspective where you don't
think of planned actions in terms of their potentially aversive or pleasant
outcomes, but instead as potential sources of useful information. You view them
in a similar way to how you would view an experiment. If an experiment does
not give you the expected result, it still gives you a range of other useful
information like what doesn't work or that your beliefs may be somehow faulty.
This type of thinking is not that intuitive because, by and large, the mind
encourages us to behave in ways that have worked before. Though this is useful
from a survival perspective,  it does not often lead us to try things that are
completely diﬀerent from what we have done before.
Use curiosity or closed vs open ways of thinking - for complex problems, your
time is sometimes better spent, not in trying to solve the problem, but instead in
searching for solutions to the problem. That is, it can be useful to jump out of
your problem solving mode or your cached routine mode and to start
questioning. This is especially true for problems that you have been trying to
solve for a long time. It is important to note that searching for solutions isn't
necessarily a wholly conscious process. It is often the case that the correct
solution has already been activated by your brain, but is not being brought to
your conscious attention because of other cached responses that are taking
priority. If you can ﬁnd some way to relax, get distracted or do something else
for a while the correct solution will sometimes, seemingly out of nowhere, pop
into your head. 
Optimizing your ability to follow through with your plans
Being Strategic - teaches you how to make a to-do system. This includes going
through tools like things like: Getting Things Done (GTD), Remember the
Milk, Workﬂowy, BeeMinder, Anki, Pomodoro Technique
Next actions - our motivation is normally dependent on our predictions, which
can be problematic. A way to avoid these problems is to just know the next
physical action that would get you closer to completion. Instead of having an
item 'do my taxes' you can have an item of 'ﬁnd tax forms and put them on
desk' which is both a concrete and small action.
Trigger Action Plans (TAP)s - is a simple algorithm that goes, "if I do x, then I will
do y." See this post.
Structured Procrastination - involves acknowledging that procrastination is
somewhat inevitable which means that it can be beneﬁcial if you spend some
time trying to optimising what you will do when you are procrastinating. If you
are probably going to end up procrastinating, you might as well get the most out
of it. For example, you might decide to procrastinate on starting an assignment
by going on a walk or cleaning the house. By using structured procrastination
you can also make your plans more pliable and capable of being completed. 
Does future me have a comparative advantage? - if you are thinking of
procrastinating and putting something oﬀ till later, try asking yourself if the
future version of you will be better oﬀ or more easily able to handle the task. If
the answer is no, then you should probably just do it now. This question is
probably more helpful for small items than large ones. 
Murphyjitsu - is essentially imagining everything that could possibly go wrong
and would stop you in reaching that goal. Then outplanning these potentialities
so that they never occur. They is referred to as outplanning Murphy. The

"Murphyjitsu" technique can be used by asking "how surprised would I be if I
failed?", followed by "what obstacles might prevent me from ﬁnishing?" For
example, "I'm going to do CrossFit three times a week and I would only be mildly
surprised if I failed" should immediately lead to problems and solutions like:
"Which days?" → "Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, at 5:30 PM, after
work, with an alarm set, and with my workout clothes always in my car."
"What if I can't go during gym hours?" → "If I can't make CrossFit, then any
exercise of equal or greater intensity and duration will suﬃce."
"What if I'm sick?" → "I don't go if I'm too sick to go to work, otherwise I
go."
"What if I'm, like, really really tired though?" → "I go anyway but take it
easy if I need to."
"What if I'm injured in a car accident?" → "Obviously don't worry about it.
Also, I need a ﬁrst aid kit in my car."
Habit practicing - Imagine that you wanted to stop sleeping in when your alarm
goes oﬀ in the morning. One way to train this habit is to practice waking up
when your alarm goes oﬀ. You would do this by turning oﬀ the lights in your
room, setting your alarm for ﬁve minutes, getting into bed, relaxing and then
mindfully getting up straight away when the alarm goes oﬀ.
(I have been told that this is no longer up to date) Urge propagation - is a
motivation hack which traces the causal link between a larger goal you really
care about and the action you don't feel motivated to take, and explains that link
to system 1 in a language it can understand. It involves ﬁnding out what your
System two wants you to do and how you can align your system one to want the
same thing. This is normally done with operant
conditioning or reinforcement. What makes things like trying to lose weight or to
learn the violin diﬃcult, is that it often causes conﬂicts with system one driven
urges, e.g. wanting a nap or craving a cookie, and because long-term goals
typically require sticking it out through a series of unpleasant intermediate
steps, e.g. eating less and practicing the violin, it can be easy to lose the original
motivation. This loss of motivation tends to not occur so frequently for things
that we feel rewarded by. This is primarily because we do these things
automatically. When I want Thai food, I don't need to volitionally force myself  to
drive there, look at the menu, go inside, order etc. I don't have to convince
myself to take those steps. They happen automatically. The point of urge
propagation is to make long-term goals feel more like short-term urges which
essentially means rewiring the brain to associate actions with rewards for the
particular task that you want to do. You can use a similar idea to discourage bad
habits. You do this by stretching out the time between an action and its reward.
For example, if you want to stop reading stuﬀ online then you can have the
pages load more slowly for non work related material. Thinking about urge
propagation leads us to realise that small aversive moments can have a drastic
impact on our choices and motivations. The aversive moment of getting into a
cold swimming pool can overwhelm the delayed rewards of doing morning laps
even though you might really like or want the rewards, e.g. being ﬁtter. In
summary the process in urge propagation is: 
Find a situation where the rewards are distanced from the actions
Associate the activity with a powerful feeling of reward, one with a
stronger neurochemical kick than the virtuous goals, e.g. 'being healthier,
that we normally aspire to.
Come up with a mental image that vividly captures that feeling and that
you can summon in moments of weakness. It should be a very sticky
image because if it isn't then you won't experience that gut-level surge of
motivation that the image is meant to cause. For example, one person was

able to overcome their aversion to push-ups, which made them feel
unpleasantly hot and sweaty, by tapping into their obsession with
longevity. They now vividly imagine the heat from the exercise as if it was
a ﬁre that burned away cell-damaging free radicals.
Learning optimization
Turbo Charged training - this is best for the types of skills that you repeat over
and over again to get your nervous system to change in order to get better at it.
The underlying idea is the rule of intensity which states that the experience of
intensity or eﬀort that you are expending to learn something corresponds with
the rate at which you are learning it. For example, 10 minutes of intense time
spent trying to learn a piano piece may be just as helpful as 1 hour of less
intense eﬀort. Turbo charged training has two main principles: maximise the
engagement with the learning process and minimize error. This means that if
you are making lots of errors then you need to slow down or make whatever you
are doing easier. If what you are doing is too easy, then you need to ﬁnd some
method to ramp it up and make it more diﬃcult. It is also important that you are
learning the right skills and are getting good feedback which is not noisy, but is
fast enough to signal to the reward centers of the brain that you are actually
making progress. This ensures that the neural patterns that were just activated
get reinforced. Turbo charged training is based on taking an outside view of
learning, i.e. looking at the people who learn really fast and what they are doing.
Planning optimization
Surprise-o-Meter - this technique involves picturing an event and observing how
surprised you would be to be in that situation. Surprise is a clue that you were
implicitly expecting something else to happen. The more surprised you are, the
less probable your subconscious thought of that event was. Also called, pre-
Hindsight which involves using emotions to evaluate how likely you are to
succeed at a goal. Imagine that, six months from now, you have not achieved
your goal. The level of surprise you feel at this outcome is a good predictor of
whether you will actually succeed. You can then use this information as input
that can be used to build plans that will actually work. 
Your inner simulator - Your "inner simulator" is CFAR's version of the distinction
between profession and anticipation.  Basically, your "inner simulator" is the
part of you that can play movies forward to determine what to anticipate: "Do I
have time to turn left before that car reaches me?"; "What will she do, if I
approach and say 'hi'?" You can use your inner simulator to develop high quality
plans. An example of this process would be asking:
What you predict will happen if you take some course of action? 
What could go wrong? 
How can you change your plans to prevent that thing from going wrong? 
This process is repeated from the ﬁrst step with your predictions updated
to take into account your preventitive measures.
Improving the accuracy of your credence levels
The credence calibration game - when you hear someone say "I'm 90% sure...",
that "90%" ﬁgure is called a credence level. Most people tend to be over-
conﬁdent by default, in the sense that when we say "90% sure", we tend to be
right much less than 90% of the time. This game is basically getting you to
practice the mental action of converting your internal sense of "sureness" into a

credence level that you can report to yourself and others. The goal is to train
this over time so that your credence levels more closely reﬂect the actual
success rates.
Mindfulness of how your internal state is aﬀecting how you perceive the
world
Againstness - is the feeling of being opposed to something. An example is when
you get angry during a heated argument. This feeling typically manifests in
sympathetic nervous system responses in the body. Some of these symptoms
could include: hunched shoulders, rubbing the neck, positioning arms to protect
the belly, raising heart rate and tensed muscles. By being mindful of your
againstness you can calm yourself and engage in a shift to the parasympathetic
nervous system, so from a mental point of view you might: try to appreciate it as
an opportunity in practicing releasing againstness, try to increase your empathy
for the other person by modelling them in enough detail that you understand
why the thing that is causing your againstness seems right to them or try to
emphasise your sense of tribal togetherness. This means that you should
attempt to see the other person as a fellow human being and wish to help them
realize their full potential. From a purely physical perspective you could: 
open your posture, i.e. have shoulders back, spine straight & upright, head
balanced on spine, belly exposed
breathe deeply, smoothly, gently and low in the diaphragm
relax the hands, arms, shoulders and eyes
try smiling/laughing
Perceptual editing - is the ability:
to recognize when you're making a personal contribution to experience
to decide whether it's a contribution you actually want to make
to leverage the opportunity and deliberately choose what contribution
you'd rather make, if any.
Coordinatizing emotion-space (and feeling it) - essentially emotional awareness,
i.e. understanding what it feels like when you are feeling a particular emotion or
set of emotions.
Keep your identity ﬂuid - our worldviews and beliefs aﬀect our valuation
processes. If there is something that you consider staunchly to be part of our
identity then you will be more likely to believe claims related to it and to defend
them. Now, this isn't necessarily a negative thing. If you want to do something,
then making it part of your identity can be a great way to motivate yourself to
achieve it. But, it can also lead you to become biased and to rationalize when
you ﬁnd things that are in opposition to your identity. A ﬂuid identity has the
discussed beneﬁts and also avoids the negatives. A ﬂuid identity is one that you
can mindfully alter for your own beneﬁt. Sometimes you might want to make it
smaller to improve your reasoning and other times you might want to make it
bigger so that it primes you to be motivated and to care.
Stop rationalizing: The what fooling yourself feels like game - we are prone to
rationalization. By practicing what it feels like when we are rationalizing we can
become more likely to notice when we are rationalizing.
CFAR sees emotional states as cues or indicators which tell you that you should
double-check your reasoning or coax yourself into another emotional state.
Changing your emotional state can be a potentially useful mechanism for
making rationality easier. For example, getting yourself into a "playful" mode
can make it easier to explore a wider set of possible actions.
Resolving Disagreements

Double Crux game - double Crux is a structured format for collaboratively ﬁnding
the truth in cases where two people disagree. Instead of non-interactively
oﬀering pieces of their respective platforms, people jointly seek the actual
question at the crux of the disagreement—the root uncertainty that has the
potential to aﬀect both of their beliefs. See this post
Other stuﬀ which has already been covered in LessWrong
Bayes' theorem - as described elsewhere, but more focused on the aspect of
sharing sources of disagreement and using a Bayesian framework for settling
those disagreements.
Checklist of rationality habits.
Look at a problem as an outsider - i.e. use reference class forecasting.

The Brain Preservation Foundation's
Small Mammalian Brain Prize won
The Brain Preservation Foundation's Small Mammalian Brain Prize has been won with
fantastic preservation of a whole rabbit brain using a new ﬁxative+slow-vitriﬁcation
process.
BPF announcement (21CM's announcement)
evaluation
The process was published as "Aldehyde-stabilized cryopreservation", McIntyre &
Fahy 2015 (mirror)
We describe here a new cryobiological and neurobiological technique,
aldehyde-stabilized cryopreservation (ASC), which demonstrates the
relevance and utility of advanced cryopreservation science for the
neurobiological research community. ASC is a new brain-banking technique
designed to facilitate neuroanatomic research such as connectomics
research, and has the unique ability to combine stable long term ice-free
sample storage with excellent anatomical resolution. To demonstrate the
feasibility of ASC, we perfuse-ﬁxed rabbit and pig brains with a
glutaraldehyde-based ﬁxative, then slowly perfused increasing
concentrations of ethylene glycol over several hours in a manner similar to
techniques used for whole organ cryopreservation. Once 65% w/v ethylene
glycol was reached, we vitriﬁed brains at −135 °C for indeﬁnite long-term
storage. Vitriﬁed brains were rewarmed and the cryoprotectant removed
either by perfusion or gradual diﬀusion from brain slices. We evaluated ASC-
processed brains by electron microscopy of multiple regions across the
whole brain and by Focused Ion Beam Milling and Scanning Electron
Microscopy (FIB-SEM) imaging of selected brain volumes. Preservation was
uniformly excellent: processes were easily traceable and synapses were
crisp in both species. Aldehyde-stabilized cryopreservation has many
advantages over other brain-banking techniques: chemicals are delivered
via perfusion, which enables easy scaling to brains of any size; vitriﬁcation
ensures that the ultrastructure of the brain will not degrade even over very
long storage times; and the cryoprotectant can be removed, yielding a
perfusable aldehyde-preserved brain which is suitable for a wide variety of
brain assays...We have shown that both rabbit brains (10 g) and pig brains
(80 g) can be preserved equally well. We do not anticipate that there will be
signiﬁcant barriers to preserving even larger brains such as bovine, canine,
or primate brains using ASC.
(They had problems with 2 pigs and got 1 pig brain successfully cryopreserved
but it wasn't part of the entry. I'm not sure why: is that because the Large
Mammalian Brain Prize is not yet set up?)
previous discussion: Mikula's plastination came close but ultimately didn't seem
to preserve the whole brain when applied.
commentary: Alcor, Robin Hanson, John Smart, Evidence-Based Cryonics, Vice,
Pop Sci
donation link

To summarize it, you might say that this is a hybrid of current plastination and
vitriﬁcation methods, where instead of allowing slow plastination (with unknown decay
& loss) or forcing fast cooling (with unknown damage and loss), a staged approach is
taking: a ﬁxative is injected into the brain ﬁrst to immediately lock down all proteins
and stop all decay/change, and then it is leisurely cooled down to be vitriﬁed.
This is exciting progress because the new method may wind up preserving better than
either of the parent methods, but also because it gives much greater visibility into the
end-results: the aldehyde-vitriﬁed brains can be easily scanned with electron
microscopes and the results seen in high detail, showing fantastic preservation of
structure, unlike regular vitriﬁcation where the scans leave opaque how good the
preservation was. This opacity is one reason that as Mike Darwin has pointed out at
length on his blog and jkaufman has also noted that we cannot be conﬁdent in how
well ALCOR or CI's vitriﬁcation works - because if it didn't, we have little way of
knowing.
EDIT: BPF's founder Ken Hayworth (Reddit account) has posted a piece, arguing that
ALCOR & CI cannot be trusted to do procedures well and that future work should be
done via rigorous clinical trials and only then rolled out. "Opinion: The prize win is a
vindication of the idea of cryonics, not of unaccountable cryonics service
organizations"
..."Should cryonics service organizations immediately start oﬀering this new ASC
procedure to their 'patients'?" My personal answer (speaking for myself, not on
behalf of the BPF) has been a steadfast NO. It should be remembered that these
same cryonics service organizations have been oﬀering a diﬀerent procedure for
years. A procedure that was not able to demonstrate, to even my minimal
expectations, preservation of the brain's neural circuitry. This result, I must say,
surprised and disappointed me personally, leading me to give up my membership
in one such organization and to become extremely skeptical of all since. Again, I
stress, current cryonics procedures were NOT able to meet our challenge EVEN
UNDER IDEAL LABORATORY CONDITIONS despite being oﬀered to paying
customers for years[1]. Should we really expect that these same organizations
can now be trusted to further develop and properly implement such a new,
independently-invented technique for use under non-ideal conditions?
Let's step back for a moment. A single, independently-researched, scientiﬁc
publication has come out that demonstrates a method of structural brain
preservation (ASC) compatible with long-term cryogenic storage in animal models
(rabbit and pig) under ideal laboratory conditions (i.e. a healthy living animal
immediately being perfused with ﬁxative). Should this one paper instantly open
the ﬂoodgates to human application? Under untested real-world conditions where
the 'patient' is either terminally ill or already declared legally dead? Should it be
performed by unlicensed persons, in unaccountable organizations, operating
outside of the traditional medical establishment with its checks and balances
designed to ensure high standards of quality and ethics? To me, the clear answer
is NO. If this was a new drug for cancer therapy, or a new type of heart surgery,
many additional steps would be expected before even clinical trials could start.
Why should our expectations be any lower for this?
The fact that the ASC procedure has won the brain preservation prize should
rightly be seen as a vindication of the central idea of cryonics -the brain's delicate
circuitry underlying memory and personality CAN in fact be preserved indeﬁnitely,
potentially serving as a lifesaving bridge to future revival technologies. But, this

milestone should certainly not be interpreted as a vindication of the very diﬀerent
cryonics procedures that are practiced on human patients today. And it should not
be seen as a mandate for more of the same but with an aldehyde stabilization
step casually tacked on. ...

Deﬁance
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/deﬁance/
The third dubious virtue is deﬁance. As with the other dubious virtues, it can get you
into trouble. Remember the law of equal and opposite advice. Used correctly, it can
play a key role in a healthy guilt-free motivation system.
I used to tell people that I'm roughly 90% deﬁance-fueled. The most common
response was "ha ha I guess you can be manipulated by reverse psychology, then";
which led me to realize that I didn't yet know how to convey what I meant by
"deﬁance fuel," so I stopped saying it. Today, we see whether I can convey what I
mean by "deﬁance fuel" yet.
Most people I talk to about deﬁance think of it as a mental stance adopted against
some authority ﬁgure. Perhaps they imagine a parental ﬁgure saying "ﬁnish your
broccoli," and a child who hates broccoli with their jaw set and smolder in their eyes,
who proceeds to eat with as much petulance as they can muster, plotting their
revenge. The feeling we imagine in that child is perhaps the standard central example
of "deﬁance."
I claim that that child does possess deﬁance-the-virtue, but not in their petulance, and
not in their opposition to an authority ﬁgure. Deﬁance-the-action is in the child
chewing with their mouth open in an open refusal to submit; deﬁance-the-virtue is in
the mental actions they make before they start chewing with their mouth open. It's in
the internal steeling they do when deciding not to be ordered around. It's in their
decision to be self-reliant, it's in their refusal to take orders lying down. If these
automatic and subconscious mental motions were verbalized, they might be written "I
am my own person; and not beholden to your whims," or "if you push me, I push
back." But they aren't verbalized, because they aren't conscious. They're reﬂexive.
Deﬁance-the-virtue is about encountering a badness that's brewing in the world, and
reﬂexively doing everything you can to throw a wrench in the works, to twist things in
your favor. Deﬁance-the-virtue is about taking nothing lying down, and refusing to let
badnesses in the universe slide.
Deﬁance isn't about acting petulantly without hesitation: A deﬁant child might bide
their time, knowing that if they act rashly there will be harsh consequences. Deﬁance
is about resisting the default state of aﬀairs without hesitation: A deﬁant child might
weigh their options and bide their time, but at no point do they wonder whether they
should defy. They simply dislike the situation, and so rebel against it.
Deﬁance-the-virtue is about having that reaction, to something that's wrong in the
world.
Of course, there's an art to defying the right things. I do recommend defying death; I
don't recommend having the "deﬁance" reaction against people who tell you to do
things in a stern and authoritative voice. People who order you around can either be
ignored or obeyed according to the social context, but they aren't usually worth
defying, except perhaps in situations where you legitimately need to demonstrate that
you're not beholden to them, and where gentler reminders have failed.

As a rule of thumb, I suggest that it's usually healthy to have a deﬁance reaction
towards states of the world, and usually unhealthy to have a deﬁance reaction
towards people.
To illustrate the diﬀerence, imagine you're Neo, twenty years after the ﬁrst matrix
movie. The sequels never happened; instead you got trapped in the matrix while one
by one, all your connections to the outside world died or disappeared. One day, you
lost your grasp on your ability to control the matrix, your abilities slipping through
your grasp like lucidity slipping away in a dream. Now you stand atop a skyscraper,
looking across the gap at its twin, unable to quite recall what it was like to ﬂy.
You stand there frozen, desperate to recall what you once knew, ﬁnding it evasive.
Behind you, someone else enters the rooftop and shouts at you over the wind.
"What the hell are you doing, you idiot?" they cry. "Get back from there! Now!"
Deﬁance-against-a-person would be to feel a burning need to show this person up,
show them that you're not beholden to their demands, and possibly do something
rash.
Deﬁance-against-the-world would be to hear this person cry out, and use the impetus
to remember what it was you used to know. You would say, "Oh, right. I'm in the
matrix." You would remember that the rules and customs of this place do not have
dominion over you, no matter what illusions the people around you are taken in by.
Your mind would snap back into focus. You would grab what you had forgotten how to
grasp, and leap.
(And those with deﬁance-the-virtue deeply instilled in them don't need the impetus
provided by another person to access the mental state — deﬁance is a property of the
relationship between them and the state of the world that they can recall at will, not a
property of the relationships between them and others.)
This is the deﬁance I mean to talk about. It's related to level hopping and skepticism
about your limitations. It's related to the skill of measuring your progress not against
others, but against what actually happens.
I've been writing a long sequence of posts on how to replace guilt-based motivation
with something else. Many people have remarked to me that my writings on averting
guilt seem inspired by Taoism. And: maybe. There are some parallels. But not here,
not with deﬁance.
Deﬁance is not about coming to terms with the world. It's about looking looking at the
world and having the same mental reﬂexes as the deﬁant child. It's about the reﬂexive
impulse to say "screw this" and choose self-reliance over hopelessness in the face of
problems that are crushingly large. It's about a deep-seated inability to go gently into
that good night. It's about being able to look at the terrible social equilibria we're all
trapped in and get pissed oﬀ — not because any individual is evil, but because almost
nobody is evil and everything is broken anyway.
Above all, it's about seeing that the wold is broken, and feeling something akin to
"fuck these mortal constraints, I'm ﬁxing things."
When the deﬁant child eats their vegetables with as much spite as is humanly
possible, there was never a thought that crossed their mind about capitulating to their

parents. Petulance was an automatic response. They weren't carefully weighing a
decision about whether to spite their parents — at best, they may have carefully
weighed a decision about whether to get their payback now, overtly; or later, subtly.
The deﬁance was a reﬂex; the fact that they weren't going to submit quietly to
authority was never in question.
Deﬁance-the-virtue is about having the same reﬂexive response, not towards an
authority ﬁgure, but towards the state of a broken world. It's about making the fact
that you struggle to ﬁx broken worlds automatic and unspoken — you might weigh
your options and bide your time, but you spare no thought for whether you will
struggle.
I don't know how to teach deﬁance, but it's one of the keystones of my motivation
system. If you want to build yourself a motivation system akin to mine, deﬁance is an
important component.
So this is how I suggest motivating yourself in place of guilt: Let the wrongness of the
world trigger something deep inside of you, such that the question stops being
whether you will capitulate or lose hope, and becomes how you will wrest the course
of the future onto a diﬀerent path. See the current state of aﬀairs as your adversary;
see the future as the prize that hangs in the balance. Shake oﬀ the illusory
constraints, set your jaw, and rebel. Defy.
Allow yourself to be a little reckless. Get a little desperate. Let deﬁance of the way
things are burn in you. Then act.

Conclusion of the Replacing Guilt
series
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/guilt-conclusion/
Today marks the end of my series on replacing guilt (table of contents).
I began the series by discussing the "restless guilt," that people feel when some part
of them thinks they aren't doing what's important. I argued that it's possible to care
about things outside yourself, and things larger than yourself, no matter what a
nihilist tells you.
In the second arc of the series I implored readers to drop their obligations and ask
themselves where they would put their eﬀorts if there was nothing they felt they
"should" be doing. If you can drop your sense of obligation and still care hard for
something larger than yourself, you are well on your way to dispensing with guilt-
based motivation.
In the third arc, I described techniques for building and maintaining a powerful
intrinsic drive without the need to spur yourself with guilt. I point out that working
yourself ragged is not a virtue, and that the "work too hard then rest a long time"
narrative is a dangerous narrative. We can't always act as we wish we could: We're
not yet gods, and it's often easier to change our behavior by exploring obstacles with
experimentation and creativity instead of attempting to berate and guilt ourselves
into submission. I plea for self compassion and argue that there are no "bad people".
In the fourth arc, I describe ways to draw on the fact that the world around you is
broken as fuel for your intrinsic drive. If, when given the choice between "bad" and
"worse" you can choose "bad" without suﬀering; if you can be content in your gambles
while having no excuses and coming to terms with the fact that you may fail, then it
becomes easy to transmute your guilt into resolve and struggle hard to make the
future as bright as you can make it.
In the ﬁfth and ﬁnal arc, I describe mindsets and mental stances from which guilt
seems an alien concept. Primary among them are "conﬁdence all the way up", the skill
of believing in your capabilities while not being overly sure of anything; and desperate
recklessness deﬁance, the three dubious virtues of those with strong intrinsic drive.
I conclude with a few words on how we will be measured: When all is said and done,
Nature will not judge us by our actions; we will be measured only by what actually
happens. Our goal, in the end, is to ensure that the timeless history of our universe is
one that is ﬁlled with whatever it is we're ﬁghting for. For me, at least, this is the
underlying driver that takes the place of guilt: Once we have learned our lessons from
the past, there is no reason to wrack ourselves with guilt. All we need to do, in any
given moment, is look upon the actions available to us, consider, and take whichever
one seems most likely to lead to a future full of light.

Recklessness
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/recklessness/
The second dubious virtue is recklessness. As with desperation, there are many bad
ways to be reckless. There is a nihilistic recklessness, in those with a muted ability to
feel and care, that is self-destructive. There is a social recklessness, when peers push
each other towards doing something dangerous that none of them would do alone, in
a demonstration of commitment that can become needlessly dangerous. And there is
a ﬁery, destructive recklessness in those too quick to anger, which can lead people to
actions they will regret for a lifetime. I caution against all these types of recklessness.
Nevertheless, there is a type of recklessness that is a virtue. This is recklessness in
the pursuit of an external goal, and I have found it to be rather rare.
I get a lot of questions from people about how cautious they should be as they make
changes in their lives. If they remove their guilt motivation, will they be able to do
anything at all? If they really try to understand how screwed up the world is, on a gut
level, will they break? If they devote their eﬀorts to the pursuit of something larger
than them, will they lose touch with their humanity, and with their ability to connect to
other human beings?
And I tend to answer: You are not made of glass.
Dive in. Change things. Fix problems. If more problems crop up, ﬁx those too.
Imagine that you look upon yourself, detect harmful guilt-based motivation, tear it
out, and then notice that this leaves you with a Zen-like lack of drive, such that most
of yourself is now happy to let days slip by but some small part of you is crying out
that something is wrong. Recklessness-the-virtue is about being in that state and
deciding to push forward rather than retreating; deciding to make a desperate eﬀort
to acquire a new drive, rather than panicking and retreating back towards guilt.
Recklessness is about ripping oﬀ the blinders that prevent you from seeing the dark
world on a gut level, and knowing that if this happens to be debilitating then you'll
ﬁnd some new way to handle it, rather than being forced to retreat.
Always forward, never back. Be unable to despair. Have conﬁdence all the way up.
Think of all the people you know who are too stagnant, too cautious about breaking
something important, to ever change at all.
You can recover from breaking a few parts of yourself, so long as you're modular
rather than fragile. You can become able to roll with a few punches.
(This seems like a good time to insert a heavy-handed reminder about the law of
equal and opposite advice! Many people would do well to gain a little recklessness,
but many others need less recklessness and more caution. If you're in a particularly
fragile mental state, consider disregarding this post entirely.)
During my undergraduate education, I was the president of an entrepreneurship club.
The ﬁrst most common type of person who would drop by asking for advice was that

young wannabe founder all full of naïve excitement about some half-formed notion
that they're about to make the next facebook. The second most common person was
that competent programmer with an idea that wasn't half-bad — maybe they had
some idea for an app that would let couples communicate in a way they couldn't yet
easily do, six years ago — but, being tempered and level-headed and well aware of
the naïvety of the ﬁrst folks, were entirely unable to commit to their idea.
Both sets of prospective entrepreneurs were doomed to failure. The ﬁrst set, for all the
obvious reasons — they'd focus too narrowly on writing code that no one would ever
buy, or fail to ﬁnd their ﬁrst users, or fail to make a minimum testable product, or
they'd dramatically misunderstand and underestimate the diﬃculty of the technical
challenges, or whatever.
The second set would fail because they didn't really expect themselves to succeed.
They could make themselves work on their idea, while reciting to themselves some
story about being risk-loving, but they couldn't get their head into the idea, to the
point where they were spending fourteen hours a day working feverishly while plans
and paths and strategies dominated their waking thoughts.
There's a fugue state that successful entrepreneurs report entering, which the second
set of people had rendered themselves unable to enter. Somehow, their realistic
understating of their odds destroyed their ability to commit.
In one fashion, this makes some sense: they, knowing that great success is likely a lie,
cannot fool their innermost self into believing in their own vision, which precludes
them from entering the fugue state.
But in another fashion, is silly. What do the odds have to do with your ability to
commit? Why is their epistemic state preventing them from entering the emotional
state that would most help them succeed?
I think there are a few diﬀerent skills it takes to be able to ender the fugue state even
while knowing that your odds of success are low. One of them, I think, is the virtue of
recklessness.
Recklessness is in the ability to say "screw the odds, I'm going to push forward on this
path as hard as I can until a better path appears." If the odds are low, a better path is
more likely to appear sooner rather than later — but the reckless let that be a fact
about the paths, and they don't further allow low odds to prevent them from pushing
forward on the best path they can currently see, as fast as possible.
If you want to become a successful entrepreneur, or if you want to succeed at other
very diﬃcult tasks, it helps to be able to take the best from both types of hopeless
entrepreneurs. Become the sort of person who can enter the fugue state and give an
idea your all, while also being able to see and avoid all the common failure modes.
The fact that you are unlikely to succeed is an epistemic fact, you do not need to give
it dominion over your motivation. Be a little reckless.
Recklessness, as a virtue, is about being able to throw caution to the wind. It's about
being able to commit yourself fully to the best path before you, and then change your
entire life at the drop of a pin as soon as a better path appears. It's about being free to
act without worrying too much about what happens if you disrupt the status quo —
too many people are already too stagnant, and we need to move faster.

So if you ﬁnd yourself knowing what it is that you need to do next, but worried that
doing so will break something else important...
then I say, do it.
Act.
Try not to break anything vital, but if you do, ﬁx it and keep moving.
Always forward, never back.
Be a little reckless.

How we will be measured
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/how-we-will-be-measured/
After nearly a year of writing, my "replacing guilt" sequence is coming to a close. I
have just one more thing to say on the subject, by pointing out a running theme
throughout the series.
When all is said and done, and Nature passes her ﬁnal judgement, you will not be
measured by the number of moments in which you worked as hard as you could. You
will not be judged by someone rooting around in your mind to see whether you were
good or bad. You will not be evaluated according to how unassailable your
explanations are, for why the things that you couldn't possibly have prevented the
things that went wrong.
You will be measured only by what actually happens, as will we all.
That doesn't mean all of us are using the same measuring stick: Some people are
working to ensure that our universe-history is one in which they in particular have a
happy and fulﬁlled life; others are working to ensure that our universe-history is one in
which their children never have to debase themselves to survive. Still others look
wide, and see poverty and destitution and suﬀering, and work to ensure that those
blemishes fade from our universe-history, in the places they can reach, near the time
of their lives. Others look far forward, working to ensure that our universe-history is
full of ﬂourishing sentient civilizations and other nice things.
All it means is that the type of thing we're all trying to do, one way or another, is
ensure that the actual history of our universe, the actual timeless structure of the
place we're embedded, is as desirable as possible. That's the type of game we're
playing: We manipulate universe-histories, for the sake of the future.
Some people have a listless guilt, thinking that nothing matters but feeling vaguely
restless as they watch themselves spend their lives on things they think are pointless.
Other people have a pointed guilt, thinking that everything matters, and berating
themselves whenever they fall short of perfection. For me, the framing that we act to
determine the shape of our actual universe-history is a framing that avoids both these
pitfalls. Is there a way you want the completed, timeless story of our universe to go?
Then act to ensure that the future is as good as you can make it. Are you wracked
with guilt about your inability to act as you wish, or regret for the things you did in the
past? Then act to ensure that the future is as good as you can make it. That's the sort
of game we're playing: At all times, act to ensure that our future is bright.
I think many people get a bit mixed up about what type of game we're playing. They
get stuck playing a social game, measuring their accomplishments by comparison to
the accomplishments of their neighbors; or they mistake someone else's expectations
for their preferences and get stuck chasing lost purposes; or someone slights them
and their vision narrows as their sole objective becomes retaliation.
I'm not saying social goals are intrinsically bad. Wealth and status are useful aids
when it comes to determining the future; the accomplishments and expectations of
your peers can provide useful measurements of your abilities. But there's a diﬀerence
between pursuing social goals for the sake of determining the course of our universe-

history, and forgetting entirely that success is measured in terms of what actually
happens throughout the course of history.
I alluded to this when I described deﬁance as "choosing self-reliance." At the end of
the day, each and every one of us is engaged in a personal struggle to determine the
future. We are not alone; there are many around us who can be friends and allies and
support us in our struggle. But the goal, in the end, is to use what resources we have
at our disposal to ensure that the universe-history is ﬁlled with light, whatever our
light may be. I hope yours includes friends and family and loved ones, but making it
happen — that is your personal task. You are encouraged to draw on the support of
friends and allies where possible; and ensuring that you have close connections may
be one of the properties you're putting into the timeless history of our universe: But
even then, the task of ensuring our universe-history is one in which you have close
connections is your personal task.
What we are doing, on this earth, is acting in such a way that our future is ﬁlled with
light. From this framing, "guilt-based motivation" is a foreign concept: If you start to
feel guilty, simply look at your situation with fresh eyes, and then act such that the
future is ﬁlled with light. Our lives are not status competitions; the world is not a
proving ground. We are participating in a gambit for the future (or, more likely, a
gambit for the shape of the multiverse), and that is all.
When there are people who oppose us out of nothing save for petty spite; when there
are obstacles that stand between us and something important to us which seem all
but insurmountable; when we encounter personal limitations that prevent us from
acting as we wish to; it is easy to confuse retaliation, overcoming adversity, and
growing stronger, with our actual goals. But crossing those hurdles is not the ﬁnal
objective: those hurdles are only parameters in our calculations about how to aﬀect
the future; they are nothing but the state of the game board in a game with cosmic
states.
In that game, some people have stronger positions than others, and more leverage
with which to determine the timeless story of our universe. Life isn't fair. But all of us,
one way or another, are here to make sure that our universe history is ﬁlled with light
— whatever 'light' may be to each of us.
So ﬁnd allies, ﬁnd friends, ﬁnd everything you need to improve your ability to ensure
that our universe-history tells a story you like. Move towards whatever levers on our
future you can ﬁnd. And then ﬁll it with light.

