
Best of LessWrong: July 2016
1. Zombies Redacted

Zombies Redacted
I looked at my old post Zombies! Zombies? and it seemed to have some extraneous
content.  This is a redacted and slightly rewritten version.
Your "zombie", in the philosophical usage of the term, is putatively a being that is
exactly like you in every respect—identical behavior, identical speech, identical brain;
every atom and quark in exactly the same position, moving according to the same
causal laws of motion—except that your zombie is not conscious.
It is furthermore claimed that if zombies are "conceivable" (a term over which battles
are still being fought), then, purely from our knowledge of this "conceivability", we can
deduce a priori that consciousness is extra-physical, in a sense to be described below.
See, for example, the SEP entry on Zombies.  The "conceivability" of zombies is
accepted by a substantial fraction, possibly a majority, of academic philosophers of
consciousness.
I once read somewhere, "You are not the one who speaks your thoughts—you are the
one who hears your thoughts".
If you conceive of "consciousness" as a quiet, passive listening, then the notion of a
zombie initially seems easy to imagine.  It's someone who lacks the the inner hearer.
Sketching out that intuition in a little more detail:
When you open a refrigerator and ﬁnd that the orange juice is gone, you think "Darn,
I'm out of orange juice."  The sound of these words is probably represented in your
auditory cortex, as though you'd heard someone else say it.
Why do I think the sound of your inner thoughts is represented in the auditory cortex,
as if it were a sound you'd heard?  Because, for example, native Chinese speakers can
remember longer digit sequences than English-speakers.  Chinese digits are all single
syllables, and so Chinese speakers can remember around ten digits, versus the
famous "seven plus or minus two" for English speakers.  There appears to be a loop of
repeating sounds back to yourself, a size limit on working memory in the auditory
cortex, which is genuinely phoneme-based.
It's not only conceivable in principle, but possibly possible in the next couple of
decades, that surgeons will lay a network of neural taps over someone's auditory
cortex and read out their internal narrative.  Researchers have already tapped the
lateral geniculate nucleus of a cat and reconstructed recognizable visual inputs.
So your zombie, being physically identical to you down to the last atom, will open the
refrigerator and form auditory cortical patterns for the phonemes "Darn, I'm out of
orange juice".  On this point, p-zombie advocates agree.
But in the Zombie World, allegedly, there is no one inside to hear; the inner listener is
missing.  The internal narrative is spoken, but unheard.  You are not the one who
speaks your thoughts, you are the one who hears them.

The Zombie Argument is that if the Zombie World is possible—not necessarily
physically possible in our universe, just "possible in theory", or "conceivable"—then
consciousness must be extra-physical, something over and above mere atoms.  Why? 
Because even if you knew the positions of all the atoms in the universe, you would
still have be told, as a separate and additional fact, that people were conscious—that
they had inner listeners—that we were not in the Zombie World.
The technical term for the belief that consciousness is there, but has no eﬀect on the
physical world, is epiphenomenalism.
Though there are other elements to the zombie argument (I'll deal with them below), I
think that the intuition of the inner listener is what ﬁrst persuades people to zombie-
ism.  The core notion is simple and easy to access:  The lights are on but nobody's
home.
Philosophers are appealing to the intuition of the quiet, passive inner listener when
they say "Of course the zombie world is imaginable; you know exactly what it would
be like."
But just because you don't see a contradiction in the Zombie World at ﬁrst glance, it
doesn't mean that no contradiction is there.  Just because you don't see an internal
contradiction yet within some set of generalizations, is no guarantee that you won't
see a contradiction in another 30 seconds.  "All odd numbers are prime.  Proof:  3 is
prime, 5 is prime, 7 is prime..."
So let us ponder the Zombie Argument a little longer:  Can we think of a
counterexample to the assertion "Consciousness has no third-party-detectable causal
impact on the world"?
If you close your eyes and concentrate on your inward awareness, you will begin to
form thoughts, in your internal narrative, along the lines of "I am aware" and "My
awareness is separate from my thoughts" and "I am not the one who speaks my
thoughts, but the one who hears them" and "My stream of consciousness is not my
consciousness" and "It seems like there is a part of me which I can imagine being
eliminated without changing my outward behavior."
You can even say these sentences out loud.  In principle, someone with a super-fMRI
could probably read the phonemes right out of your auditory cortex; but saying it out
loud removes all doubt about whether you have entered the realms of physically
visible consequences.
This certainly seems like the inner listener is being caught in the act of listening by
whatever part of you writes the internal narrative, a causally potent neural pattern in
your auditory cortex, which can eventually move your lips and ﬂap your tongue.
Imagine that a mysterious race of aliens visit you, and leave you a mysterious black
box as a gift.  You try poking and prodding the black box, but (as far as you can tell)
you never elicit a reaction.  You can't make the black box produce gold coins or
answer questions.  So you conclude that the black box is causally inactive:  "For all X,
the black box doesn't do X."  The black box is an eﬀect, but not a cause;
epiphenomenal, without causal potency.  In your mind, you test this general
hypothesis to see if the generalization is true in some trial cases, and it seems to be
true in every one—"Does the black box repair computers?  No.  Does the black box
boil water?  No."

But you can see the black box; it absorbs light, and weighs heavy in your hand.  This,
too, is part of the dance of causality.  If the black box were wholly outside the causal
universe, you wouldn't be able to see it; you would have no way to know it existed;
you could not say, "Thanks for the black box."  You didn't think of this
counterexample, when you formulated the general rule:  "All X: Black box doesn't do
X".  But it was there all along.
(Actually, the aliens left you another black box, this one purely epiphenomenal, and
you haven't the slightest clue that it's there in your living room.  That was their joke.)
If something has no causal eﬀect, you can't know about it.  The territory must be
causally entangled with the map for the map to correlate with the territory.  To 'see'
something is to be aﬀected by it.  If an allegedly physical thing or property has
absolutely no causal impact on the rest of our universe, there's a serious question
about whether we can even talk about it, never mind justiﬁably knowing that it's
there.
It is a standard point—which zombie-ist philosophers accept!—that the Zombie
World's philosophers, being atom-by-atom identical to our own philosophers, write
identical papers about the philosophy of consciousness.
At this point, the Zombie World stops being an intuitive consequence of the idea of an
inner listener.
Philosophers writing papers about consciousness would seem to be at least one eﬀect
of consciousness upon the world.  You can argue clever reasons why this is not so, but
you have to be clever.  You are no longer playing straight to the intuition.
Let's say you'd never heard of the Zombie World and never formed any explicit
generalizations about how zombies are supposed to exist.  The thought might
spontaneously occur to you that, as you stand and watch a beautiful sunset, your
awareness of your awareness could be subtracted from you without changing your
outward smile.  But then ask whether you still think "I am aware of my inner
awareness", as a neural pattern in your auditory cortex, and then say it out loud, after
the inner awareness has been subtracted.  I would not expect the generalization "my
inner awareness has no eﬀect on physical things" to still seem intuitive past that
point, if you'd never been explicitly indoctrinated with p-zombieism.
Intuitively, we'd suppose that if your inward awareness vanished, your internal
narrative would no longer say things like "There is a mysterious listener within me,"
because the mysterious listener would be gone and you would not be thinking about
it.  It is usually immediately after you focus your awareness on your awareness, that
your internal narrative says "I am aware of my awareness"; which suggests that if the
ﬁrst event never happened again, neither would the second.
Once you see the collision between the general rule that consciousness has no eﬀect,
to the speciﬁc implication that consciousness has no eﬀect on how you think about
consciousness (in any way that aﬀects your internal narrative that you could choose
to say out loud), zombie-ism stops being intuitive.  It starts requiring you to postulate
strange things.
One strange thing you might postulate is that there's a Zombie Master, a god within
the Zombie World who surreptitiously takes control of zombie philosophers and makes
them talk and write about consciousness.

Human beings often don't sound all that coherent when talking about consciousness. 
It might not be that hard to fake.  Maybe you could take, as a corpus, one thousand
human amateurs trying to discuss consciousness; feed them into a suﬃciently
powerful but non-reﬂective machine learning algorithm; and get back discourse about
"consciousness" that sounded as sensible as most humans, which is to say, not very.
But this speech about "consciousness" would not be produced within the AI.  It would
be an imitation of someone else talking.  You might as well observe that you can make
a video recording of David Chalmers (the most formidable advocate of zombieism)
and play back the recording.  The cause that shaped the pattern of the words in the
video recording was Chalmers's consciousness moving his lips; that shaping cause is
merely being transmitted through a medium, like sounds passing through air.
A separate, extra Zombie Master is not what the philosophical Zombie World
postulates.  It's asserting that the atoms in the brain are quark-by-quark identical,
moving under exactly the same physical laws we know; there's no separate, additional
Zombie Master AI Chatbot making the lips move in ways that were copied oﬀ the real
David Chalmers.  The zombie you's lips are talking about consciousness for the same
causal reason your lips talk about consciousness.
As David Chalmers writes:
Think of my zombie twin in the universe next door. He talks about conscious
experience all the time—in fact, he seems obsessed by it. He spends ridiculous
amounts of time hunched over a computer, writing chapter after chapter on the
mysteries of consciousness. He often comments on the pleasure he gets from
certain sensory qualia, professing a particular love for deep greens and purples.
He frequently gets into arguments with zombie materialists, arguing that their
position cannot do justice to the realities of conscious experience.
And yet he has no conscious experience at all! In his universe, the materialists are
right and he is wrong. Most of his claims about conscious experience are utterly
false. But there is certainly a physical or functional explanation of why he makes
the claims he makes. After all, his universe is fully law-governed, and no events
therein are miraculous, so there must be some explanation of his claims.
...Any explanation of my twin's behavior will equally count as an explanation of
my behavior, as the processes inside his body are precisely mirrored by those
inside mine. The explanation of his claims obviously does not depend on the
existence of consciousness, as there is no consciousness in his world. It follows
that the explanation of my claims is also independent of the existence of
consciousness.
Chalmers is not arguing against zombies; those are his actual beliefs!
This paradoxical situation is at once delightful and disturbing.  It is not obviously
fatal to the nonreductive position, but it is at least something that we need to
come to grips with...
I would seriously nominate this as the largest bullet ever bitten in the history of time. 
And that is a backhanded compliment to David Chalmers:  A lesser mortal would
simply fail to see the implications, or refuse to face them, or rationalize a reason it
wasn't so.

Why would anyone bite a bullet that large?  Why would anyone postulate unconscious
zombies who write papers about consciousness for exactly the same reason that our
own genuinely conscious philosophers do?
Not because of the ﬁrst intuition I wrote about, the intuition of the quiet inner listener. 
That intuition may say that zombies can drive cars or do math or even fall in love, but
it doesn't say that zombies write philosophy papers about their quiet inner listeners.
No, the drive to bite this bullet comes from an entirely diﬀerent intuition—the intuition
that no matter how many atoms you add up, no matter how many masses and
electrical charges interact with each other, they will never necessarily produce a
subjective sensation of the mysterious redness of red.  It may be a fact about our
physical universe (Chalmers says) that putting such-and-such atoms into such-and-
such a position, evokes a sensation of redness; but if so, it is not a necessary fact, it is
something to be explained above and beyond the motion of the atoms.
But if you consider the second intuition on its own, without the intuition of the quiet
listener, it is hard to see why irreducibility implies zombie-ism.  Maybe there's just a
diﬀerent kind of stuﬀ, apart from and additional to atoms, that is not causally passive
—a soul that actually does stuﬀ.  A soul that plays a real causal role in why we write
about "the mysterious redness of red".  Take out the soul, and... well, assuming you
just don't fall over in a coma, you certainly won't write any more papers about
consciousness!
This is the position taken by Descartes and most other ancient thinkers:  The soul is of
a diﬀerent kind, but it interacts with the body.  Descartes's position is technically
known as substance dualism—there is a thought-stuﬀ, a mind-stuﬀ, and it is not like
atoms; but it is causally potent, interactive, and leaves a visible mark on our universe.
Zombie-ists are property dualists—they don't believe in a separate soul; they believe
that matter in our universe has additional properties beyond the physical.
"Beyond the physical"?  What does that mean?  It means the extra properties are
there, but they don't inﬂuence the motion of the atoms, like the properties of
electrical charge or mass.  The extra properties are not experimentally detectable by
third parties; you know you are conscious, from the inside of your extra properties, but
no scientist can ever directly detect this from outside.
So the additional properties are there, but not causally active.  The extra properties do
not move atoms around, which is why they can't be detected by third parties.
And that's why we can (allegedly) imagine a universe just like this one, with all the
atoms in the same places, but the extra properties missing, such that every atom
moves the same as before, but no one is conscious.
The Zombie World might not be physically possible, say the zombie-ists—because it is
a fact that all the matter in our universe has the extra properties, or obeys the
bridging laws that evoke consciousness—but the Zombie World is logically possible:
the bridging laws could have been diﬀerent.
But why, oh why, say that the extra properties are epiphenomenal and undetectable?
We can put this dilemma very sharply:  Chalmers believes that there is something
called consciousness, and this consciousness embodies the true and indescribable
substance of the mysterious redness of red.  It may be a property beyond mass and

charge, but it's there, and it is consciousness.  Now, having said the above, Chalmers
furthermore speciﬁes that this true stuﬀ of consciousness is epiphenomenal, without
causal potency—but why say that?
Why say that you could subtract this true stuﬀ of consciousness, and leave all the
atoms in the same place doing the same things?  If that's true, we need some
separate physical explanation for why Chalmers talks about "the mysterious redness
of red".  That is, there exists both a mysterious redness of red, which is extra-physical,
and an entirely separate reason, within physics, why Chalmers talks about the
"mysterious redness of red".
Chalmers does confess that these two things seem like they ought to be related, but
why do you need to assert two separate phenomena?  Why not just assert one or the
other?
Once you've postulated that there is a mysterious redness of red, why not just say
that it interacts with your internal narrative and makes you talk about the "mysterious
redness of red"?
Isn't Descartes taking the simpler approach, here?  The strictly simpler approach?
Why postulate an extramaterial soul, and then postulate that the soul has no eﬀect on
the physical world, and then postulate a mysterious unknown material process that
causes your internal narrative to talk about conscious experience?
Why not postulate the true stuﬀ of consciousness which no amount of mere
mechanical atoms can add up to, and then, having gone that far already, let this true
stuﬀ of consciousness have causal eﬀects like making philosophers talk about
consciousness?
I am not endorsing Descartes's view.  But at least I can understand where Descartes is
coming from.  Consciousness seems mysterious, so you postulate a mysterious stuﬀ
of consciousness.  Fine.
But now the zombie-ists postulate that this mysterious stuﬀ doesn't do anything, so
you need a whole new explanation for why you say you're conscious.
That isn't vitalism.  That's something so bizarre that vitalists would spit out their
coﬀee.  "When ﬁres burn, they release phlogiston.  But phlogiston doesn't have any
experimentally detectable impact on our universe, so you'll have to go looking for a
separate explanation of why a ﬁre can melt snow."  What?
Are property dualists under the impression that if they postulate a new active force,
something that has a causal impact on physics, they will be sticking their necks out
too far?
Me, I'd say that if you postulate a mysterious, separate, additional, inherently mental
property of consciousness, above and beyond positions and velocities, then, at that
point, you have already stuck your neck out.  To postulate this stuﬀ of consciousness,
and then further postulate that it doesn't do anything—for the love of cute kittens,
why?
There isn't even an obvious career motive.  "Hi, I'm a philosopher of consciousness. 
My subject matter is the most important thing in the universe and I should get lots of

funding?  Well, it's nice of you to say so, but actually the phenomenon I study doesn't
do anything whatsoever."
Chalmers is one of the most frustrating philosophers I know.  He does this really sharp
analysis... and then turns left at the last minute.  He lays out everything that's wrong
with the Zombie World scenario, and then, having reduced the whole argument to
smithereens, calmly accepts it.
Chalmers does the same thing when he lays out, in calm detail, the problem with
saying that our own beliefs in consciousness are justiﬁed, when our zombie twins say
exactly the same thing for exactly the same reasons and are wrong.
On Chalmers's theory, Chalmers saying that he believes in consciousness cannot be
causally justiﬁed; the belief is not caused by the fact itself, like looking at an actual
real sock being the cause of why you say there's a sock.  In the absence of
consciousness, Chalmers would write the same papers for the same reasons.
On epiphenomenalism, Chalmers saying that he believes in consciousness cannot be
justiﬁed as the product of a process that systematically outputs true beliefs, because
the zombie twin writes the same papers using the same systematic process and is
wrong.
Chalmers admits this.  Chalmers, in fact, explains the argument in great detail in his
book.  Okay, so Chalmers has solidly proven that he is not justiﬁed in believing in
epiphenomenal consciousness, right?  No.  Chalmers writes:
Conscious experience lies at the center of our epistemic universe; we have access
to it directly.  This raises the question: what is it that justiﬁes our beliefs about our
experiences, if it is not a causal link to those experiences, and if it is not the
mechanisms by which the beliefs are formed?  I think the answer to this is clear: it
is having the experiences that justiﬁes the beliefs. For example, the very fact that
I have a red experience now provides justiﬁcation for my belief that I am having a
red experience...
Because my zombie twin lacks experiences, he is in a very diﬀerent epistemic
situation from me, and his judgments lack the corresponding justiﬁcation.  It may
be tempting to object that if my belief lies in the physical realm, its justiﬁcation
must lie in the physical realm; but this is a non sequitur. From the fact that there is
no justiﬁcation in the physical realm, one might conclude that the physical portion
of me (my brain, say) is not justiﬁed in its belief. But the question is whether I am
justiﬁed in the belief, not whether my brain is justiﬁed in the belief, and if property
dualism is correct than there is more to me than my brain.
So—if I've got this thesis right—there's a core you, above and beyond your brain, that
believes it is not a zombie, and directly experiences not being a zombie; and so its
beliefs are justiﬁed.
But Chalmers just wrote all that stuﬀ down, in his very physical book, and so did the
zombie-Chalmers.
The zombie Chalmers can't have written the book because of the zombie's core self
above the brain; there must be some entirely diﬀerent reason, within the laws of
physics.

It follows that even if there is a part of Chalmers hidden away that is conscious and
believes in consciousness, directly and without mediation, there is also a separable
subspace of Chalmers—a causally closed cognitive subsystem that acts entirely within
physics—and this "outer self" is what speaks Chalmers's internal narrative, and writes
papers on consciousness.
I do not see any way to evade the charge that, on Chalmers's own theory, this
separable outer Chalmers is deranged.  This is the part of Chalmers that is the same
in this world, or the Zombie World; and in either world it writes philosophy papers on
consciousness for no valid reason.  Chalmers's philosophy papers are not output by
that inner core of awareness and belief-in-awareness, they are output by the mere
physics of the internal narrative that makes Chalmers's ﬁngers strike the keys of his
computer.
And yet this deranged outer Chalmers is writing philosophy papers that just happen to
be perfectly right, by a separate and additional miracle.  Not a logically necessary
miracle (then the Zombie World would not be logically possible).  A physically
contingent miracle, that happens to be true in what we think is our universe, even
though science can never distinguish our universe from the Zombie World.
I think I speak for all reductionists when I say Huh? 
That's not epicycles.  That's, "Planetary motions follow these epicycles—but epicycles
don't actually do anything—there's something else that makes the planets move the
same way the epicycles say they should, which I haven't been able to explain—and by
the way, I would say this even if there weren't any epicycles."
According to Chalmers, the causally closed system of Chalmers's internal narrative is
(mysteriously) malfunctioning in a way that, not by necessity, but just in our universe,
miraculously happens to be correct.  Furthermore, the internal narrative asserts "the
internal narrative is mysteriously malfunctioning, but miraculously happens to be
correctly echoing the justiﬁed thoughts of the epiphenomenal inner core", and again,
in our universe, miraculously happens to be correct.
Oh, come on!
Shouldn't there come a point where you just give up on an idea?  Where, on some raw
intuitive level, you just go:  What on Earth was I thinking?
Humanity has accumulated some broad experience with what correct theories of the
world look like.  This is not what a correct theory looks like.
"Argument from incredulity," you say.  Fine, you want it spelled out?  The said
Chalmersian theory postulates multiple unexplained complex miracles.  This drives
down its prior probability, by the conjunction rule of probability and Occam's Razor.  It
is therefore dominated by at least two theories which postulate fewer miracles,
namely:
Substance dualism:
There is a stuﬀ of consciousness which is not yet understood, an
extraordinary super-physical stuﬀ that visibly aﬀects our world; and this
stuﬀ is what makes us talk about consciousness.
Not-quite-faith-based reductionism:
That-which-we-name "consciousness" happens within physics, in a way not
yet understood, just like what happened the last three thousand times

humanity ran into something mysterious.
Your intuition that no material substance can possibly add up to
consciousness is incorrect.  If you actually knew exactly why you talk about
consciousness, this would give you new insights, of a form you can't now
anticipate; and afterward you would realize that your arguments about
normal physics having no room for consciousness were ﬂawed.
Compare to:
Epiphenomenal property dualism:
Matter has additional consciousness-properties which are not yet
understood.  These properties are epiphenomenal with respect to
ordinarily observable physics—they make no diﬀerence to the motion of
particles.
Separately, there exists a not-yet-understood reason within normal physics
why philosophers talk about consciousness and invent theories of dual
properties.
Miraculously, when philosophers talk about consciousness, the bridging
laws of our world are exactly right to make this talk about consciousness
correct, even though it arises from a malfunction (drawing of logically
unwarranted conclusions) in the causally closed cognitive system that
types philosophy papers.
I know I'm speaking from limited experience, here.  But based on my limited
experience, the Zombie Argument may be a candidate for the most deranged idea in
all of philosophy.
There are times when, as a rationalist, you have to believe things that seem weird to
you.  Relativity seems weird, quantum mechanics seems weird, natural selection
seems weird.
But these weirdnesses are pinned down by massive evidence.  There's a diﬀerence
between believing something weird because science has conﬁrmed it overwhelmingly
—
—versus believing a proposition that seems downright deranged, because of a great
big complicated philosophical argument centered around unspeciﬁed miracles and
giant blank spots not even claimed to be understood—
—in a case where even if you accept everything that has been told to you so far,
afterward the phenomenon will still seem like a mystery and still have the same
quality of wondrous impenetrability that it had at the start.
The correct thing for a rationalist to say at this point, if all of David Chalmers's
arguments seem individually plausible, is:
"Okay... I don't know how consciousness works... I admit that... and maybe I'm
approaching the whole problem wrong, or asking the wrong questions... but this
zombie business can't possibly be right.  The arguments aren't nailed down enough to
make me believe this—especially when accepting it won't make me feel any less
confused.  On a core gut level, this just doesn't look like the way reality could really
really work."
But this is not what I say, for I don't think the arguments are plausible.  "In general, all
odd numbers are prime" looked "conceivable" when you had only thought about 3, 5,

and 7.  It stopped seeming reasonable when you thought about 9.
Zombies looked conceivable when you looked out at a beautiful sunset and thought
about the quiet inner awareness inside you watching that sunset, which seemed like it
could vanish without changing the way you walked or smiled; obedient to the
plausible-sounding generalization, "the inner listener has no outer eﬀects".  That
generalization should stop seeming possible when you say out loud, "But wait, I am
thinking this thought right now inside my auditory cortex, and that thought can make
my lips move, translating my awareness of my quiet inner listener into a motion of my
lips, meaning that consciousness is part of the minimal closure of causality in this
universe."  I can't think of anything else to say about the conceivability argument.
 The zombies are dead.

