
Changing your Mind With Memory
Reconsolidation
1. A Framework for Internal Debugging
2. Book summary: Unlocking the Emotional Brain
3. A Practical Theory of Memory Reconsolidation
4. Practical Guidelines for Memory Reconsolidation
5. The Hierarchy of Memory Reconsolidation Techniques
6. Reconsolidation Through Experience
7. Reconsolidation Through Questioning

A Framework for Internal Debugging
When I'm debugging myself or others for unproductive behavioral, emotional, or
mental patterns (hereby referred to as patterns) , I use this quasi-linear framework to
make sure that I don't miss any critical steps and the issue stays solved. I've used this
framework successfully with clients, housemates at Gentle Mesa, and hotel mates at
The EA Hotel, as well as in debugging my own internal conﬂicts. I'm currently creating
a GuidedTrack course that takes people through search of these steps and their
associated techniques.
This model makes some assumptions about the underlying structure of the internal
issue. It generally assumes that our patterns have internal reasons behind them, that
those reasons are often coded as subconscious beliefs about the world or yourself,
and that those beliefs sometimes cluster together to be understood as what we often
refer to as "parts" or "subagents".
Finally, it assumes that when we have a pattern that we consider negative, one way to
understand this is a tension between the part that is causing the pattern and the part
that sees that pattern as negative (hereby referred to as anti-patterns). A successful
debugging is one in which that tension is dissolved, rearranged, or in rare cases,
accepted.
1. Awareness
The ﬁrst step to solving an internal conﬂict is recognizing that you have it. In this
stage, you use awareness of self-talk, mental imagery, and bodily sensations to notice
that there's something "oﬀ".
Associated Techniques
Mindfulness
CFAR's Bug List Prompts
CFAR's MurphyJitsu
2. Introspection
In this stage, you work to understand the cause of the pattern. You're trying to make
explicitly conscious the beliefs that underlie the pattern. On the ﬂipside, you're
working to understand the cause of the anti-pattern, and the beliefs that cause the
pattern to be seen as problem.
It's often useful here to not just understand the ﬁrst level need being met (e.g. "I don't
want to procrastinate because it lets me be more productive") but to ﬁnd the "deeper
cut" - The deeper need or fear that is being served (e.g. "If I'm not productive than I
don't deserve anybody's love")
Finally, in this step, it's important to check for "second order constructions" - that is,
do I have a belief that this tension needs to exist in order to meet another need. Do I

have a belief that if either of these beliefs are dissolved something bad will happen
(beyond not meeting the original need the belief was obstensibly there for).
For example "I have to believe that my father is a nice person, because if I didn't the
identity based on my childhood would crumble and that would be scary," or"It's
important to strike a balance between being productive and relaxing so that I can see
myself as well rounded. If I dissolve this tension, I'll stop being well-rounded."
Associated Techniques
Gendlin's Focusing
Leverage's Belief Reporting
Pj Eby's Relaxed Mental Inquiry
Coherence Therapy's Radical Inquiry
3. Acceptance
In the acceptance stage, you're working to truly integrate that you've been choosing
this pattern over an alternative in order to get your needs met (based on the beliefs
you introspected in the last step). You're also working to accept that this pattern is not
malicious or something to be destroyed, but instead honor that it's based on it's
wisdom and beliefs. On the ﬂip side, you're looking to accept the deeper cut behind
the anti-pattern, and the deep reasons that drove you to try to solve the problem in
the ﬁrst place.
There are two diﬀerent ﬂavors of acceptance. A more 'yin' acceptance in which you're
accepting the beliefs you had as valid and embracing them with love, which can be
hard for the anti-pattern. And a 'yang' acceptance in which you're taking ownership
that you've caused the negative pattern in your life and chosen to continue it up to
now, against the protests of the anti-pattern. Note that if you merely ﬂipped which
part was the pattern and the anti-pattern, the yin and yang methods ﬂip as well.
A complete acceptance that doesn't cause problems in the future should include both
types of acceptance, which as pointed out is symmetrical to an acceptance of both
parts (the pattern and the anti-pattern).
Associated Techniques
Coherence Therapy's Practice of Verbalizing Beliefs
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy's Half Smile, Open Hands
Neuro-Linguistic Programming's Future Projection
Sedona Method's Three Questions
4. Memory Reconsolidation
In the memory reconsolidation stage, the goal is to ﬁnd a way to get all needs met.
This can involve the pattern and the anti-pattern both dissolving to create a third, new
pattern. Or it can involve either the pattern or the anti-pattern dissolving in a
realization they're not required to get their need met. Sometimes, it can involve an

add on belief that even though the pattern or the anti-pattern is not getting their need
met, that's ok temporarily.
There are dozens of techniques I've cataloged for working diﬀerent types of
reconsolidation on diﬀerent types of patterns encoded in diﬀerent modalities. In fact,
the alignment part of the process itself a process of going through a series of diﬀerent
types of techniques based on the properties of the patterns until you ﬁnd one that ﬁts.
A useful distinction to have is between techniques that use reconditioning (that is,
slowly building up the new belief neuron pathways over time, so they it ﬁre instead of
the old one) with techniques that use reintegration (that is, they use the process of
emotional memory reintegration to change the original pathway such that they match
the new belief). Reintegration techniques should be a go-to as they are much faster
and more permanent, but it's good to have both tools in your toolbox. I'll be writing a
post up about this distinction and the book I learned it from (Unlocking the Emotional
Brain) at some point.
Associated Techniques
CFAR's Internal Double Crux
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy's Thought Countering
Bryon Katie's The Work
Mark Lippman's Folding
My Dialectical Reprocessing Technique
5. Completeness and Creation
This is really two steps, but it's rolled into one for the purposes of keeping the process
linear. Now that you've made a new pattern through reconsolidation that aims to get
all needs met, you need to make sure that you have everything you need to actually
meet that need.
For instance, you started with a pattern that said you needed to be serious all the time
to get work done, and a pattern that didn't like being serious all the time because it
didn't help you socially. Your new pattern says that you can work in an easy, carefree
joking way. However, when you use some of the "completeness checks" below, you
realize that you're missing some of the internal and external resources needed to
actually act easy, carefree and joking.
You realize that even though you no longer have a self-image of yourself as
serious, you still don't have an image of yourself as carefree.
You realize that even though you imagine yourself joking around with this new
belief, when you get higher resolution you don't actually have the skill to make
jokes.
So, you use the creation step to install these new supporting beliefs, habits, and skills
needed to actually get your needs met.
Associated Completeness Check Techniques
CFAR's MurphyJitsu

Neuro-Linguistic Programming's Future Projection.
TRIZ's 9 Window Technique
Associated Creation Techniques
CFAR's Trigger-Action Plans
Steve Andreas's Self-Image Installation
My Three Books Technique
Neuro-Linguistic Programming's Swish Technique
6. Ecology
Now that you've made many changes internally, a ﬁnal check of your whole life and
environment is done to ensure that you haven't created conﬂicts and tension
elsewhere in the process of resolving your old pattern and anti-pattern. You'll use a
number of techniques to see consequences of the changes you made, and then you'll
use your awareness techniques to notice any new conﬂicts that arise. If any do, you'll
repeat the rest of the process.
Associated Techniques
CFAR's Inner-Sim
Neuro-Linguistic Programming's Perceptual Positions
Timeline Therapy's Timeline Check
7. Integration
In the integration step, you'll take the new patterns you've created in the
reconsolidation and creation steps. and integrate them in two ways. Firstly, you'll want
to tie the new neuron pattern for the pathway to as many other paths as possible, lest
you forget it. Second, you'll want to make the new pattern as deeply as possible tied
to your most fundamental values, such that it becomes core to who you are.
Associated Techniques
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy's Mental Rehearsal
Neuro-Linguistic Programming's Swish Technique
Connirae Andreas's Parental Timeline Reimprinting
Connirae Andreas's Core Transformation
My Modality Integration Technique
Conclusion
This is a process that has been invaluable to me in helping myself and others
overcome bothersome patterns. It gives you a framework to hang many techniques on
such that you know when they're useful. And it shows you where things may not be

working for you if you're skipping or missing steps. I hope others can get some use
from it.

Book summary: Unlocking the
Emotional Brain
If the thesis in Unlocking the Emotional Brain (UtEB) is even half-right, it may be one
of the most important books that I have read. Written by the psychotherapists Bruce
Ecker, Robin Ticic and Laurel Hulley, it claims to oﬀer a neuroscience-grounded,
comprehensive model of how eﬀective therapy works. In so doing, it also happens to
formulate its theory in terms of belief updating, helping explain how the brain models
the world and what kinds of techniques allow us to actually change our minds.
Furthermore, if UtEB is correct, it also explains why rationalist techniques such as
Internal Double Crux [1 2 3] work.
UtEB's premise is that much if not most of our behavior is driven by emotional
learning. Intense emotions generate unconscious predictive models of how the world
functions and what caused those emotions to occur. The brain then uses those models
to guide our future behavior. Emotional issues and seemingly irrational behaviors are
generated from implicit world-models (schemas) which have been formed in response
to various external challenges. Each schema contains memories relating to times
when the challenge has been encountered and mental structures describing both the
problem and a solution to it.
According to the authors, the key for updating such schemas involves a process of
memory reconsolidation, originally identiﬁed in neuroscience. The emotional brain's
learnings are usually locked and not modiﬁable. However, once an emotional schema
is activated, it is possible to simultaneously bring into awareness knowledge
contradicting the active schema. When this happens, the information contained in the
schema can be overwritten by the new knowledge.
While I am not convinced that the authors are entirely right, many of the book's
claims deﬁnitely feel like they are pointing in the right direction. I will discuss some of
my caveats and reservations after summarizing some of the book's claims in general.
I also consider its model in the light of an issue of a psychology/cognitive science
journal devoted to discussing a very similar hypothesis.
Emotional learning
In UtEB's model, emotional learning forms the foundation of much of our behavior. It
sets our basic understanding about what situations are safe or unsafe, desirable or
undesirable. The authors do not quite say it explicitly, but the general feeling I get is
that the subcortical emotional processes set many of the priorities for what we want
to achieve, with higher cognitive functions then trying to ﬁgure out how to achieve it -
often remaining unaware of what exactly they are doing.
UtEB's ﬁrst detailed example of an emotional schema comes from the case study of a
man in his thirties they call Richard. He had been consistently successful and admired
at work, but still suﬀered from serious self-doubt and low conﬁdence at his job. On
occasions such as daily technical meetings, when he considered saying something, he
experienced thoughts including "Who am I to think I know what's right?", "This could
be wrong" and "Watch out - don't go out on a limb". These prevented him from
expressing any opinions.

From the point of view of the authors, these thoughts have a deﬁnite cause - Richard
has "emotional learnings according to which it is adaptively necessary to go into
negative thoughts and feelings towards [himself]." The self-doubts are a strategy
which his emotional brain has generated for solving some particular problem.
Richard's therapist guided Richard to imagine what it would feel like if he was at one
of his work meetings, made useful comments, and felt conﬁdent in his knowledge
while doing so. This was intended to elicit information about what Richard's emotional
brain predicted would happen if it failed to maintain the strategy of self-doubt. The
book includes the following transcript of what happened after Richard started
imagining the scene as instructed:
Richard: Now I'm feeling really uncomfortable, but-it's in a diﬀerent way.
Therapist: OK, let yourself feel it - this diﬀerent discomfort. [Pause.] See if any
words come along with this uncomfortable feeling.
Richard: [Pause.] Now they hate me.
Therapist: "Now they hate me." Good. Keep going: See if this really
uncomfortable feeling can also tell you why they hate you now.
Richard: [Pause.] Hnh. Wow. It's because... now I'm... an arrogant asshole... like
my father... a totally self-centered, totally insensitive know-it-all.
Therapist: Do you mean that having a feeling of conﬁdence as you speak turns
you into an arrogant asshole, like Dad?
Richard: Yeah, exactly. Wow.
Therapist: And how do you feel about being like him in this way?
Richard: It's horrible! It's what I've always vowed not to be!
Richard had experienced his father as being assertive as well as obnoxious and hated.
His emotional brain had identiﬁed this as a failure mode to be avoided: if you are
assertive, then you are obnoxious and will be hated. The solution was to generate
feelings of doubt so as to stop him from being too conﬁdent. This caused him
suﬀering, but the prediction of his emotional brain was that acting otherwise would
produce even worse suﬀering, as being hated would be a terrible fate.
UtEB describes Richard as having had the following kind of unconscious schema:
Perceptual, emotional and somatic memory of original experiences: his
suﬀering from his father's heavily dominating, hyper-conﬁdent self-expression,
plus related suﬀering from unmet needs for fatherly expressions of love,
acceptance, understanding, validation. (This is the "raw data"; matching features
in current situations are triggers of the whole schema.)
A mental model or set of linked, learned constructs operating as living
knowledge of a problem and a solution:
The problem: knowledge of a vulnerability to a speciﬁc suﬀering.
Conﬁdent assertiveness in any degree inﬂicts crushing oppression on others and
is hated by them. I would be horrible like Dad and hated by others, as he is, if I

asserted my own knowledge or wishes conﬁdently. (This is a model of how the
world is, and current situations that appear relevant to this model are triggers of
the whole schema.)
The solution: knowledge of an urgent broad strategy and concrete
tactic(s) for avoiding that suﬀering. Never express any conﬁdent
assertiveness, to avoid being horrible and hated (general strategy and pro-
symptom purpose), by vigilantly noticing any deﬁnite knowledge or opinions
forming in myself and blocking them from expression by generating potently self-
doubting, self-invalidating thoughts (concrete tactic and manifested symptom).
Emotional schemas can be brought to light during a variety of ways, including
Focusing, IFS, and imagining yourself doing something and seeing what you expect to
happen as a result.
But suppose that you do manage to bring up a schema which seems wrong to you.
What do you do then?
Memory reconsolidation: updating the
emotional learning
The formation of memory traces involves consolidation, when the memory is ﬁrst laid
out in the brain; deconsolidation, when an established memory is "opened" and
becomes available for changes; and reconsolidation, when a deconsolidated memory
(along with possible changes) is stored and becomes frozen again. The term
"reconsolidation" is also used to refer to the general process from deconsolidation to
reconsolidation; UtEB generally applies the term to mean the entire process. Unless
the context indicates otherwise, I do the same.
UtEB reviews some of the history of memory research. Until 1997, neuroscientists
believed that past emotional learning became permanently locked in the brain, so that
memories could only consolidate, never de- or reconsolidate. More recent research
has indicated that once a memory becomes activated, it is temporarily unlocked,
allowing it to be changed or erased.
Starting from 2004, new studies suggested that activation alone is not suﬃcient to
deconsolidate the memory. The memories are used to predict that things will occur in
a similar fashion as they did previously. Besides just activation, there has to be a
signiﬁcant mismatch between what one experiences and what the memory suggests
is about to happen. The violation of expectation can be qualitative (the predicted
outcome not occurring at all) or quantitative (the magnitude of the outcome not being
fully predicted). In either case, it is this prediction error which triggers the
deconsolidation and subsequent reconsolidation.
The memory erasure seems to be speciﬁc to the interpretation from which the
prediction was produced. For example, someone who has had an experience of being
disliked may later experience being liked. This may erase the emotional generalization
"I am inherently dislikable", but it will not erase the memory of the person also having
been disliked.

Applied reconsolidation: an example
of the schema update process
So, assuming that the model outlined above is correct, how does one apply it in
practice?
From what we have discussed so far, the essential steps of erasing a learned belief
(including an emotional schema) involves identifying it, activating it, and then ﬁnding
a mismatch between its prediction and reality.
The ﬁrst diﬃculty is that the beliefs involved with the schema are not necessarily
consciously available at ﬁrst. Richard knew that he suﬀered from a lack of self-esteem,
but he was not aware of its reason. The process started from him describing in
concrete details how this manifested: as skeptical self-talk during a daily meeting.
As he was guided to imagine what would happen if he didn't have those thoughts and
acted conﬁdently, his therapist was seeking to retrieve the implicit schema and bring
it into consciousness so that its contents would become available for access. Once it
had been retrieved, the therapist and Richard worked together to express the belief in
the schema in maximally emotional language:
"Feeling any conﬁdence means I'm arrogant, self-centered, and totally insensitive
like Dad, and people will hate me for it, so I've got to never feel conﬁdent, ever."
The authors have developed a therapeutic approach called Coherence Therapy, whose
steps closely follow the steps of the memory reconsolidation process. The example of
Richard is from this school of therapy.
In Coherence Therapy (as well as related approaches, such as Internal Family
Systems), one initially avoids any impulse to argue with or disprove the retrieved
schema. This would risk it being pushed away before it has become suﬃciently
activated to allow for reconsolidation.
Instead, one stays with it. Richard was given a card with the above phrase and
instructed to review it every day until the next therapy session, just feeling the extent
to which it felt true to him. This served to further integrate access to the schema in
question, making it better consciously available.
Two weeks later, Richard had frequently noticed his self-doubt, used it as a prompt for
reading the card, and experienced its description ringing true as a reason for his
thoughts. When speaking with his therapist, he mentioned a particular event which
had stuck in his memory. In a recent meeting, he had thought of a solution to a
particular problem, but then kept quiet about it. A moment later, another person had
spoken up and suggested the same solution in a conﬁdent manner. Looking around,
Richard had seen the person's solution and conﬁdence being received positively by
the others. Richard had been struck by how that reaction diﬀered from what his
schema predicted would happen if he had made the same suggestion in that tone.
Because Richard had made the implicit assumptions in his schema explicit, he was
able to consciously notice a situation which seemed to violate those assumptions: a
prediction mismatch. His therapist recognized this as a piece of contradictory
knowledge which could be used to update the old schema. The therapist then guided

Richard through a process intended to activate the old schema while bringing the
contradictory information into awareness, triggering a reconsolidation process.
The therapist ﬁrst instructed Richard to mentally bring himself back to the situation
where he had just thought of the solution, but held it back. To properly activate the
schema, the therapist guided Richard's attention to the purpose behind his reluctance
and Richard's certainty of any conﬁdence making him disliked. Next, the therapist told
Richard to re-live what happened next: the other person making the same suggestion,
and the other people in the room looking pleased rather than angry.
The book then has a transcript of the therapist guiding Richard to repeat this
juxtaposition of the old schema and the disconﬁrming experience (italicized brackets
in the original):
Therapist: Stay with that. Stay with being surprised at what you're seeing—
surprised because in your life, you've had such a deﬁnite knowing that saying
something conﬁdently to people will always come across like Dad, like an
obnoxious know-it-all, and people will hate that. That's what you know, yet at the
same time, here you're seeing that saying something conﬁdently isn't always like
Dad, and then people are ﬁne with it. And it's quite a surprise to know that. [That
was an explicit prompting of another side-by-side experiencing of the two
incompatible knowings, with the therapist expressing empathy for both, with no
indication of any favoring of one knowing over the other. The therapist paused for
several seconds, then asked:] Does it feel true to describe it like that? Your old
knowing right alongside this other new knowing that's so diﬀerent?
Richard: [Quietly, seeming absorbed in the experience.] Yeah.
Therapist: [Softly.] All along, it seemed to you that saying something conﬁdently
could be done only in Dad's dominating way of doing it, and now suddenly you're
seeing that saying something conﬁdently can be done very diﬀerently, and it feels
ﬁne to people. [This was another deliberate repetition of the same juxtaposition
experience.]
Richard: Yeah.
Therapist: Mm-hm. [Silence for about 20 seconds.] So, how is it for you be in
touch with both of these knowings, the old one telling you that anything said with
conﬁdence means being like Dad, and the new one that knows you can be
conﬁdent in a way that feels okay to people? [Asking this question repeated the
juxtaposition experience yet again, and, in addition, the "how is it" portion of the
question prompted Richard to view the experience with mindful or metacognitive
awareness, while remaining in the experience.]
Richard: It's sort of weird. It's like there's this part of the world that I didn't notice
before, even though it's been right there.
Therapist: I'm intrigued by how you put that. Sounds like a signiﬁcant shift for
you.
Richard: Yeah, it is. Huh.
Therapist: You're seeing both now, the old part of the world and this other part of
the world that's new, even though it was right there all along. [That cued the
juxtaposition experience for a fourth time, followed by silence for about 30

seconds.] So, keep seeing both, the old part and the new part, when you open
your eyes in a few seconds and come back into the room with me. [Richard soon
opens his eyes and blinks a few times.] Can you keep seeing both?
Richard: Yeah.
Therapist: What's it like to see both and feel both now? [With the transformation
sequence complete, this question begins the next step of veriﬁcation— Step V—
because it probes for whether the target learning still exists as an emotional
experience.]
Richard: [Pause, then sudden, gleeful laughter.] It's kind of funny! Like, what?
How could I think that? [This is an initial marker indicating that the pro-symptom
schema may have been successfully disconﬁrmed, depotentiated, and dissolved
by the transformation sequence.]
Therapist: Do you mean, how could you think that simply saying what you know,
or mentioning some good idea that you've had, would make you seem arrogant,
insensitive and dominating like Dad and be hated for it?
Richard: [Laughing again.] Yeah!
Afterwards, the therapist and Richard wrote a new card together, which Richard was
told to review daily:
All along it's been so clear that if I conﬁdently say what I know, I will always come
across as arrogant, insensitive, and dominating like Dad, and be hated for it. And
it's so weird, looking around the room and seeing that it doesn't come across like
that.
The purpose of the card was to provide additional juxtaposition experiences between
the old schema and the new knowledge. While the original transformation sequence
might have been enough to eliminate the old schema, the schema might also have
been stored in the context of many diﬀerent situations and contained in several
memory systems. In such a situation, further juxtapositions would have helped deal
with it.
In a follow-up meeting, Richard reported having lost the feelings of self-doubt, and
that speaking up no longer felt like it was any big deal. To verify that the old schema
really had lost its power, the therapist tried deliberately provoking his old fears again:
Dropping his voice to a quieter tone, the therapist added, "But tell me, when you
have something to say and just say it, what about the danger of coming across as
a know-it-all, like Dad, and being hated for that? What about your fear of that and
how urgent it is to protect yourself from that?" [...]
Richard took in the question, gazed at the therapist in silence for a few seconds,
and then replied, "Well, I don't know what to tell you. All I can say is, that doesn't
trouble me any more. And hearing you say it, it seems a little strange that it ever
did—like, what was my problem?"
Applied reconsolidation: the schema
update process in general

Now that we have looked at a speciﬁc example, we can look at a more general version
of the process.
Accessing sequence
In Coherence Therapy, the accessing sequence is the preliminary phase of making
both a person's implicit schema and some disconﬁrming knowledge accessible, so
that they can be used in the juxtaposition process:
1. Symptom identiﬁcation. Establishing which speciﬁc symptoms the person
regards as problematic, and when and where they manifest. In Richard's case,
the general symptom was a lack of conﬁdence, which speciﬁcally manifested as
negative self-talk in meetings.
2. Retrieval of target learning. Bringing into explicit awareness the purpose behind
the symptoms. This can then be used to guide the search for disconﬁrming
knowledge, as well as accessing the original schema in order to reconsolidate it.
In Richard's case, the purpose was to avoid expressing conﬁdence in a way that
would make people hate him.
3. Identiﬁcation of disconﬁrming knowledge. Identifying some past or present
experience which directly contradicts the original learning. This knowledge does
not necessarily need to feel "better" or "more positive" than the old one, just as
long as it is mutually exclusive with the old one. In Richard's case, the
disconﬁrming knowledge was the experience of his co-worker conﬁdently
proposing a solution and being well-received.
Erasure sequence
Once both the target schema and the disconﬁrming knowledge are known, the
erasure steps can be applied to update the learning:
1. Reactivation of the target schema. Tapping into the felt truth of the original
learning, experiencing it as vividly as possible.
2. Activation of disconﬁrming knowledge, mismatching the target schema.
Activating, at the same time, the contradictory belief and having the experience
of simultaneously believing in two diﬀerent things which cannot both be true.
3. Repetitions of the target-disconﬁrmation pairing.
Something that the authors emphasize is that when the target schema is activated,
there should be no attempt to explicitly argue against it or disprove it, as this risks
pushing it down. Rather, the belief update happens when one experiences their old
schema as vividly true, while also experiencing an entirely opposite belief as vividly
true. It is the juxtaposition of believing X and not-X at the same time, which triggers
an inbuilt contradiction-detection mechanism in the brain and forces a restructuring of
one's belief system to eliminate the inconsistency.
The book notes that this distinguishes Coherence Therapy from approaches such as
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, which is premised on treating some beliefs as
intrinsically irrational and then seeking to disprove them. While UtEB does not go
further into the comparison, I note that this is a common complaint that I have heard
of CBT: that by defaulting to negative emotions being caused by belief distortions, CBT
risks belittling those negative emotions which are actually produced by correct
evaluations of the world.

I would personally add that not only does treating all of your beliefs - including
emotional ones - as provisionally valid seem to be a requirement for actually updating
them, this approach is also good rationality practice. After all, you can only seek
evidence to test a theory, not conﬁrm it.
If you notice diﬀerent parts of your mind having conﬂicting models of how the world
works, the correct epistemic stance should be that you are trying to ﬁgure out which
one is true - not privileging one of them as "more rational" and trying to disprove the
other. Otherwise it will be unavoidable that your preconception will cause you to
dismiss as false beliefs which are actually true. (Of course, you can still reasonably
anticipate the belief update going a particular way - but you need to take seriously at
least the possibility that you will be shown wrong.)
This can actually be a relief. Trying to stack the deck towards receiving favorable
evidence would just also sabotage the brain's belief update process. So you might as
well give up trying to do so, relax, and just let the evidence come in.
I speculate that this limitation might also be in place in part to help avoid the error
where you decide which one of two models is more correct, and then discard the other
model entirely. Simultaneously running two contradictory schemas at the same time
allows both of them to be properly evaluated and merged rather than one of them
being thrown away outright. I suspect that in Richard's case, the resulting process
didn't cause him to entirely discard the notion that some behaviors will make him
hated like his dad was - it just removed the overgeneralization which had been
produced by having too little training data as the basis of the schema.
Of course, this means that there does need to be some contradictory information
available which could be used to disprove the original schema. One might have a
schema for which no disconﬁrmation is available because it is correct, or a schema
which might or might not be correct but which is making things worse and cannot
easily be disconﬁrmed. UtEB mentions the example of a man, "Tómas", who had a
desire to be understood and validated by someone important in his life. Tómas
remarked that a professional therapist who was being paid for his empathy could
never fulﬁll that role. The update contradicting the schema that nobody in his life
really understood him, would have to come from someone actually in his life.
Another issue that may pop up with the erasure sequence is that there is another
schema which predicts that, for whatever reason, running this transformation may
produce adverse eﬀects. In that case, one needs to address the objecting schema
ﬁrst, essentially be carrying out the entire process on it before returning to the original
steps. (This is similar to the phenomenon in e.g. Internal Family Systems, where
objecting parts may show up and have their concerns addressed before work on the
original part can proceed.)
Veriﬁcation step
Finally, after the erasure sequence has been run, one seeks to verify that lasting
change has indeed happened and that the target schema has been transformed. UtEB
oﬀers the following behavioral markers as signs that a learning which has previously
generated emotional responses has in fact been erased:
"A speciﬁc emotional reaction abruptly can no longer by reactivated by cues and
triggers that formerly did so or by other stressful situations."

"Symptoms of behavior, emotion, somatics, or thought that were expressions of
that emotional reaction also disappear permanently."
"Non-recurrence of the emotional reaction and symptoms continues eﬀortlessly
and without counteractive or preventive measures of any kind."
The authors interpret current neuroscience to say that only memory reconsolidation
can produce these kinds of markers. They cannot be produced by counteractive or
competitive processes, such as trying to learn an opposite habit to replace a neurotic
behavior. Counteractive processes are generally fragile and susceptible to relapse.
When these markers are observed in clinical work, UtEB argues that one may infer
that reconsolidation has led to the original learning being replaced.
Further examples
For additional examples of the schema update process, I recommend reading the
book, which contains several more case studies of issues which were dealt with using
this approach. Here's a brief summary of the most detailed ones (note that some of
these examples are actually more detailed and include additional complications, such
as more than one symptom-producing schema; I have only summarized the most
prominent ones to give a taste of them):
"Charlotte". Issue: obsessive attachment to a former lover. Schema: "It would be
much better if I was merged with my lover". Contradictory knowledge: The harm
caused by not having boundaries.
"Ted". Issue: an inability to hold a steady job and a general lack of success in
life. Schema: "If my life is a mess, my father will be forced to admit how badly
he screwed up as a parent." Contradictory knowledge: Realizing that Ted's father
would never admit failure, no matter what.
"Brenda". Issue: stage fright when having a leading role in an upcoming play.
Schema: being on the stage in front of an audience means being unable to get
oﬀ, causing helplessness similar to when Brenda was in a car with her alcoholic
father and couldn't get oﬀ. Contradictory knowledge: re-imagining the scene and
the way how Brenda could actually have gotten out of the car.
"Travis". Issue: inability to experience intimate emotional closeness in
relationships. Schema: "Nobody will pay attention to how I feel or give me
understanding for how I'm hurting. I don't matter, and I'm all on my own."
Contradictory knowledge: the therapist's empathic presence and listening.
"Regina". Issue: strong anxiety and panic during/after interacting with other
people. Schema: "I'm acceptable and lovable only if I do everything perfectly."
Contradictory knowledge: Regina's Uncle Theo loves her regardless of what
imperfections she might have.
"Carol". Issue: wanting to avoid sex with her husband despite feeling
emotionally close to him. Schema: engaging in any sexuality means being
overtly sexual and harming Carol's daughter, in the way that Carol was harmed
by her mother's overt sexuality. Contradictory knowledge: once the schema was
made conscious, it activated the brain's spontaneous mismatch detection
mechanisms and started to feel silly.
As the last item suggests, sometimes just making a schema explicit is enough to start
to dismantle it. The authors suggest that the brain has a built-in detection system
which compares any consciously experienced beliefs for inconsistencies with other
things that a person knows, and can spontaneously create juxtaposition experiences
by bringing up such inconsistent information. They suggest that therapies which are

based on digging up previously unconscious material, but which do not have an
explicit juxtaposition step, work to the extent that the uncovered material happens to
trigger this spontaneous mismatch detection. (We already saw this happening with
Richard - once his underlying schema had been made conscious, he was startled to
later notice what seemed like a contradiction.)
One may note the connection to the model in Consciousness and the Brain that when
some subsystem in the brain manages to elevate a mental object into the content of
consciousness, multiple subsystems will synchronize their processing around that
object. If the object is an explicit belief, then any subsystem which is paying attention
to that object may presumably detect inconsistencies with that subsystem's own
models.
Besides these case studies from Coherence Therapy, the authors also analyze
published case studies from Accelerated Experiental Dynamic Psychotherapy,
Emotion-Focused Therapy, Eye-Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing, and
Interpersonal Neurobiology. They try to show how these cases also carried out a
juxtaposition process, even if the theoretical frameworks of those therapies did not
explicitly realize it. It is the claim of the authors that any therapy which causes lasting
emotional change does it through reconsolidation. Finally, the book contains four
essays from other therapists (using Coherence Therapy and EMDR), who analyze
some of their own case studies.
Evaluating the book's plausibility
Now that we have looked at the book's claims, let's look at whether we should believe
in them.
It is unclear to me how reliable the neuroscience results are; the authors cite a
number of studies, but each individual claim only references a relatively small number
of them.
On a brief look, I could not ﬁnd any reviews or papers that would have directly made a
critical assessment of the book's model. However, I found something that might be
even better.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences is a respected journal covering subject areas across the
cognitive sciences. BBS publishes "target articles" which present some kind of a thesis
or review about a particular topic, together with tens of brief commentaries which
respond to the target article, and a ﬁnal response by the target article's authors to the
commentaries.
In 2015, four prestigious (with a total of 500 published research articles between
them) psychologists published a BBS target article, Memory reconsolidation,
emotional arousal, and the process of change in psychotherapy: New insights from
brain science (Lane et al. 2015). While the exact model that they outline has a
number of diﬀerences from the UtEB model, the core idea is the same: that
therapeutic change from a wide variety of therapeutic approaches, "including
behavioral therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, emotion-focused therapy, and
psychodynamic psychotherapy, results from the updating of prior emotional memories
through a process of reconsolidation that incorporates new emotional experiences."

One interesting diﬀerence was that Lane et al. describe emotional schemas somewhat
diﬀerently. In their model, the schemas form memory structures with three mutually
integrated components: emotional responses, episodic/autobiographical memories,
and semantic structures (e.g. abstract beliefs which generalize over the various
incidents, such as the claim that "people are untrustworthy"). Any of these
components can be used as an entry point to the memory structure, and can
potentially update the other components through reconsolidation. They hypothesize
that diﬀerent forms of therapy work by accessing diﬀerent types of components: e.g.
behavior therapy and emotion-focused therapy access emotional responses,
conventional psychoanalysis uses access to biographical memories, and cognitive
behavioral therapy accesses semantic structures.
I read the target article, all the commentaries, and the responses. Given the
similarities between Lane et al.'s model and the UtEB model, I think we can consider
the responses to Lane et al. to generally oﬀer a useful evaluation of the UtEB model
as well.
One signiﬁcant diﬀerence which needs to be noted is that Lane et al.'s model of
memory reconsolidation does not mention the requirement for a prediction mismatch
before reconsolidation can happen. This was remarked on in the response from UtEB's
authors. In their counter-response, Lane et al. noted UtEB's model to be highly
compatible with theirs, and remarked that further research is needed to nail down the
conditions which make reconsolidation the most eﬀective.
The other responses to Lane et al. were mostly from psychologists, psychiatrists, and
neuroscientists, but also included the occasional economist, philosopher, philologist
and folklorist. Several of the responses were generally positive and mostly wanted to
contribute additional details or point out future research directions.
However, there were also a number of skeptical responses. A common theme which
emerged from several concerned the limitations of the current neuroscience research
on memory reconsolidation. In particular, most of the studies so far have been carried
out on rats, and speciﬁcally testing the elimination of a fear response to electric
shocks. As one of the responses points out, "neither the stimuli nor the subjects are
generalizable to the kind of rich autobiographical memories involved in therapy." A
number also raised the question whether all therapeutic change really involves
reconsolidation, as opposed to some related mechanism, such as creating new
memory structures which compete with the original as opposed to replacing it.
My non-expert reading is that the critical responses are right in that a gap remains
between the clinical and behavioral ﬁndings on the other hand, and the neuroscience

ﬁndings on the other. There are various patterns which can be derived from
psychological research and clinical therapy experience, and a small number of
neuroscience ﬁndings which establish the existence of something that could explain
those patterns. However, the neuroscience ﬁndings have only been established in a
rather narrow and limited context; the connection between them and the higher-level
patterns is a plausible link, but it remains speculative nonetheless.
Personally I consider the book's model tentatively promising, because it seems to
explain many observations which I had independently arrived at before reading it. For
example, I had noticed an interesting thing with anxieties, where I let e.g. a sensation
of social anxiety stay active in my mind, neither accepting it as truth nor pushing it
away while I went to do social things. This would then cause the anxiety to update,
making me feel less anxious if it was indeed the case that the social interaction was
harmless. This ﬁts nicely together with the framework of an activated memory
structure becoming open to reconsolidation and then being updated by a prediction
mismatch (the situation not being as bad as expected).
Likewise, in my post Integrating disagreeing subagents, I reviewed a variety of
rationality and therapeutic techniques, and suggested that they mostly worked either
by merging or combining two existing models that a person's brain already had, or
augmenting the existing models by collecting additional information.
In particular, I considered an example from cognitive behavioral therapy, where a man
named Walter was feeling like he was impossible to be in a relationship with after he
had broken up with his boyfriend. At the same time, he did not think that someone
else breaking up with their partner was an indication of them being impossible to be in
a relationship with. He and his therapist role-played an interaction where the therapist
pretended to be a friend who had recently broken up, and Walter explained why this
did not make the friend a relationship failure. In the process of doing so, Walter
suddenly realized that he wasn't a failure, either.
I commented:
Walter was asked whether he'd say something harsh to a friend, and he said no,
but that alone wasn't enough to improve his condition. What did help was putting
him in a position where he had to really think through the arguments for why this
is irrational in order to convince his friend, and then, after having formulated the
arguments once himself, get convinced by them himself.
In terms of our framework, we might say that a part of Walter's mind contained a
model which output a harsh judgment of himself, while another part contained a
model which would output a much less harsher judgment of someone else who
was in otherwise identical circumstances. Just bringing up the existence of this
contradiction wasn't enough to change it: it caused the contradiction to be
noticed, but didn't activate the relevant models extensively enough for their
contents to be reprocessed.
But when Walter had to role-play a situation where he thought of himself as
actually talking with a depressed friend, that required him to more fully activate
the non-judgmental model and apply it to the relevant situation. This caused him
to blend with the model, taking its perspective as the truth. When that
perspective was then propagated to the self-critical model, the easiest way for the
mind to resolve the conﬂict was simply to alter the model producing the self-
critical thoughts.

This seems like a straightforward instance of belief juxtaposition, and one where I
ended up independently deriving something like UtEB's memory reconsolidation
model: I too noted that the relevant belief structures need to be simultaneously
activated in the right way to allow for the brain to revise one of them after noticing
the contradiction. In general, UtEB's model of how things work rings true in my
experience, making me inclined to believe that its description of how therapy works is
correct, and that its model of how it is connected to neuroscience might also be.
UtEB and the subagent model
As many readers know, I have been writing a sequence of posts on multi-agent
models of mind. In Building up to an Internal Family Systems model, I suggested that
the human mind might contain something like subagents which try to ensure that past
catastrophes do not repeat. In subagents, coherence, and akrasia in humans, I
suggested that behaviors such as procrastination, indecision, and seemingly
inconsistent behavior result from diﬀerent subagents having disagreements over what
to do.
As I already mentioned, my post on integrating disagreeing subagents took the model
in the direction of interpreting disagreeing subagents as conﬂicting beliefs or models
within a person's brain. Subagents, trauma and rationality further suggested that the
appearance of drastically diﬀerent personalities within a single person might result
from unintegrated memory networks, which resist integration due to various traumatic
experiences.
This post has discussed UtEB's model of conﬂicting emotional schemas in a way which
further equates "subagents" with beliefs - in this case, the various schemas seem
closely related to what e.g. Internal Family Systems calls "parts". In many situations, it
is probably fair to say that this is what subagents are.
That said, I think that while this covers a very important subset of subagents, not
everything which I have been referring to as a subagent falls straightforwardly under
the belief-schema model. In subagents and neural Turing machines as well as Against
"System 1" and "System 2", I also covered subagents in a more general way, as also
including e.g. the kinds of subsystems which carry out object recognition and are used
to carry out tasks like arithmetic. This was also the lens through which I looked at
subagents in my summary of Consciousness and the Brain. Which kind of view is the
most useful, depends on exactly what phenomenon we are trying to understand.

A Practical Theory of Memory
Reconsolidation
Memory Reconsolidation is one candidate for a scientiﬁc of theory of "How to Actually
Change Your Mind." In this post, I'll give a few fake frameworks about how memory
reconsolidation works, in order to provide intuition pumps for the rest of the sequence.
Schemas as Belief Clusters
For the purposes of this sequence, we'll describe a schema as a particular cluster of
felt Aliefs that point towards a goal or set of goals.
I often ﬁnd it useful to think of beliefs as arranged in a hierarchy of goals, as theorized
in Perceptual Control Theory, Connection Theory, and Predictive Processing Theory.

Schemas, or Parts, then represent clusters of these beliefs trying to achieve some
speciﬁc need.

In this framework, schema's don't represent any sort of natural boundary, and we can
expand them and contract them at will based on what we're working on. Schemas
themselves can overlap without natural boundaries, and can even contain their own
internal conﬂicts.
3 Steps to Reconsolidate Schemas
In Unlocking the Emotional Brain, the authors state three steps needed for memory re-
consolidation:

1. Activate the Old Schema
2. Challenge the Old Schema
3. Learn a Replacement Schema
All of the techniques covered in this sequence implicitly or explicitly cover the three
steps. However, step #3 is also augmented later on in the Debugging Process through
the "Integration" step.
The Tradeoﬀ Between Activation and
Challenge
There's an inherent tradeoﬀ between activating the old schema and challenging it.
The stronger and more perceptible the challenge is, the more likely it is to be strong
enough to trigger the reconsolidation. However, this strength comes with two
downsides:
1. Challenging yourself in a very strong way doesn't feel good. It feels internally
violent.
2. The stronger the challenge, the more likely you are to deactivate the schema you're
challenging, creating resistance and making reconsolidation impossible.
For this reason, we start with the techniques that provide the weakest challenges, and
gradually work our way up to stronger and stronger challenge, waiting till we feel a
shift towards a more nuanced and accurate schema.
4 Schema Access Points
In Kaj's Post on Unlocking the Emotional Brain, he points to a paper by Lane et al that
give 3 ways to access a schema:
Because I think the names for these 3 methods to access a schema are overly long
and technical, I'm going to call them Felt Sense (Emotional Responses), Belief
(Semantic Structures) and Evidence (Episodic Memories). Based on my own
experience with changework, I'll also add a fourth category, Metaphor (metaphorical
representations of a schema).
Felt Sense involves looking at the physiological or indescribable "Feelings" evoked by
a schema. An example is the tightness in your throat you get when trying to express

yourself.
Belief involves the semantic content of a schema as expressed through language. An
example is "If I express myself, then I will be ridiculed."
Evidence represents our internal memories of how we learned the schema. An
example is blurting something out in 4th grade and being laughed at.
Metaphor represents some novel/new way of representing the schema, as an object,
location, situation, or story. An example is imagining that you're wearing a mask at all
times, and if you take it oﬀ people will see the silly clown face underneath and laugh
at you.

Practical Guidelines for Memory
Reconsolidation
This post details a set of guidelines for working with the memory reconsolidation tools
in the rest of the sequence. Use it to get the most out of your memory reconsolidation
procedure.
Start with the More Cognitively Fused
Schema
For every belief schema you're working with, there's (at least) two belief schema's at
play. There's the side that believes a particular thing, and then there's a side that
wants you to question the belief in that thing. As a general rule, you should always
start with the side that's more cognitively fused.
As an example, I was working with someone who was having issues going to bed on
time, and wanted to change that. Before we started looking at the schema of "I should
avoid ruminating by staying up late," We ﬁrst examined the schema of "I should get
more sleep."
By starting with the schema that you're more cognitively fused with, you avoid
conﬁrmation bias and end up with more accurate beliefs at the end.
The Resistance is the Way
If at any point, you encounter resistance to working on a particular technique with a
particular schema, what you've found is a "Meta-schema" that believes changing this
belief would be harmful. Rather than push through this resistance, loop back to the
beginning of the Debugging process, and work with this new schema.
As an example, I found myself trying to change the schema that "I should avoid
failure". I kept getting resistance, looped back, and found the schema "Most people
should like me.", only once I worked on reconsolidating that schema was I able to
return to the original schema.
Reverse Your Fusion
For any given technique, there's two ways you can approach it. You can work with the
schema from "Inside" experiencing it as who you are, or you can work with it from the
"Outside", putting some distance between yourself and the schema. As a general rule,
I recommend reversing whatever your default is. If you frequently cognitively fuse
with a schema, I recommend creating some distance/dissociation from it. If you
frequently distance/dissociate from a schema, when doing the technique try as much
as you can to fuse with it. This shift in perspective often goes a long way in providing
new perspectives on the schema and allowing the re-consolidation to take place.

Go With the Most Salient Access Point
In contrast to the last point, you want to use whatever your natural inclination is as far
as the schema access point. If a memory is coming up, use the evidence access point,
if semantic content is coming up, use the belief access point, etc. Being able to ﬂuidly
switch access points to the schema as diﬀerent things come up for you is key to quick
reconsolidation.
Experiencing a Schema as True Allows for
Updating
Via Kaj Satola
Something that been useful to me recently has been remembering that according
to memory reconsolidation principles, experiencing an incorrect emotional belief
as true is actually necessary for revising it. Then, when I get an impulse to push
the wrong-feeling belief out of my mind, I instead take the objecting part or
otherwise look for counterevidence and let the counterbelief feel simultaneously
true as well. That has caused rapid updates the way Unlocking the Emotional
Brain describes.
I think that basically the same kind of thing (don't push any part out of your mind
without giving it a say) has already been suggested in IDC, IFS etc.; but in those,
I've felt like the framing has been more along the lines of "consider that the
irrational-seeming belief may still have an important point", which has felt hard to
apply in cases where I feel very strongly that one of the beliefs is actually just
false. Thinking in terms of "even if this belief is false, letting myself experience it
as true allows it to be revised" has been useful for those situation

The Hierarchy of Memory
Reconsolidation Techniques
As discussed in the previous post, the aim is to start with the techniques that least
challenge existing schema, and then work up the hierarchy to techniques that more
strongly challenge the existing schema.
Experience involves simply sitting with the schema as it is, and seeing if change
comes from prolonged viewing of the schema.
Question involves posing questions about the schema, to draw attention to ways that
it may be wrong.
Challenge involves directly providing counters to the schema, and seeing how it
reacts.
Dissonance involves holding both the counter to the schema and the schema itself at
once.
Change involves attempting to directly change how you represent the schema to take
your counter into account.

Reconsolidation Through Experience
At this level, you're simply sitting with the schema. Oftentimes, this alone can produce
a dramatic shift through memory reconsolidation simply as a matter of re-evaluating
the old schema when you get a look at it. I also include non-memory reconsolidation
techniques in this category that work through extinction of the old association.
Experiencing Evidence
Memory Collection
Memory collection involves ﬁnding and allowing yourself to experience every time you
can remember when you felt or acted through a particular belief schema. For each
piece of evidence, you allow yourself to think and feel through the schema in that
particular memory, then move on to the next one. By simply allowing ourselves to see
all the evidence for a schema with our current perspective, we can often come to a
more nuanced understanding of the belief. I ﬁrst learned about this technique through
PJ Eby,who calls it the Feeling Elimination Technique. The book, thinking things done,
that it was included in, is no longer available as far as I'm aware.
Imaginal Exposure
Imaginal exposure is a process of taking a particular salient memory/fear/trauma etc,
and simply running through the experience over and over. This can often trigger
memory reconsolidation, and, even if not, can change your schema through simple
exhaustion induced extinction. EMDR is a version of imaginal exposure that adds the
modality of moving your eyes back and forth as you run through the memory. My
current best view of the evidence is that EMDR has no long term beneﬁt over imaginal
exposure, but the data is confusing.
Experiencing Beliefs
The Acceptance Statement
An acceptance statement is a tool from Coherence Therapy, that involves taking a
belief, and the choices you've made about a belief and saying them out loud. For
instance I could state out loud "I should not express myself. If I do, I'll be ostracized.
I've decided it's more important to not be ostracized than to be fully seen." Saying this
out loud is often enough to trigger the schema, and hearing out out loud is often
enough to automatically trigger the questioning of the schema.
You can enhance this process by (in your imagination or in real life), saying the
statement outloud to someone who has been aﬀected by the choices you've made. I
could imagine saying to my partner: "I should not express myself. If I do, you will

ostracize me. I've decided it's more important to not be ostracized than to be fully
seen by you."
Emotional Freedom Technique is a process that combines saying acceptance
statements out loud with tapping various parts of your body. It's unclear to me based
on the evidence if the tapping adds anything outside of simply stating the beliefs.
Experiencing Felt Senses
Sitting With
A common recommendation is simply to spend some time sitting with your feelings.
By simply sitting with the feeling, it gives you time to process it, allowing you to
reconsolidate the schema with your new processed understanding.
Expressing
Another way to experience felt senses is to express them. Focusing is one process
that allows you to express your felt senses, as are common forms of expressive
therapy like Art Therapy.
Experiencing Metaphors
Clean Language
Clean Language is a series of questions you can ask yourself to start exploring your
own metaphors. Simply by exploring our metaphors, we can often get a new
perspective and reconsolidate them.

Reconsolidation Through Questioning
At this level, you're actively asking yourself questions about the correctness of the
schema. You're not looking for any particular answers to these questions, or trying to
get any result, you're simply holding the questions and seeing what comes up.
When coaching and teaching workshops, I ﬁnd that questioning techniques are the
most consistently successful at creating memory reconsolidation. They seem to strike
the optimal balance of challenge and non-judgement.
They seem to work by actively directing our attention towards areas where the
schemas may not match up with reality, without provoking any resistance by actively
suggesting the schemas are wrong. For this reason, it's quite important that you don't
actively try to "ﬁnd answers" to these questions, as this starts to move into countering
territory, and sticking at the questioning level can often work to change schemas that
active countering cannot.
Questioning Evidence
The Lefkoe Belief Questions
The Lefkoe Belief Process is a process for ﬁnding diﬀerent meanings for our evidence
than the ones currently in our schema. Although the lefkoe belief process actually
involves actively challenging the meaning, I've reworked it into a series of questions
that simply allow you to question the evidence and draw your attention to ways that it
might be interpreted diﬀerently.
The questions are:
1. What is this memory evidence of?
2. Is it possible that there are other interpretations of this memory?
3. What are some other possible interpretations of this memory?
4. How would my belief change if this memory no longer counted as evidence?
Remember, the goal is not to look for any speciﬁc answers, rather to simply hold these
questions one by one in relation to the schema and see what comes up for you.
Questioning Beliefs
The Work of Byron Katie
The Work of Byron Katie is a method for questioning semantic beliefs, especially those
related to "shoulds". The ﬁrst part of the method involves a series of four questions
related to your belief:
1. Is this true?
2. Can I be absolutely sure its' true?

3. How do I react, what happens when I believe that thought?
4. Who or what would I be without this thought?
Remember, the goal is not to look for any speciﬁc answers, rather to simply hold these
questions one by one in relation to the schema and see what comes up for you.
Questioning Felt Senses
The Sedona Method
The Sedona Method is a 3 step process for questioning the need to hold on to a
particular felt sense. Because the ﬁrst step is asking one of 3 questions, you can
repeat steps 2 and 3 for each question, for a total of 9 questions.
1. Ask yourself one of the following questions:
1a. Could I let this feeling go?
1b. Could I allow this feeling to be here?
1c. Could I welcome this feeling?
2. Would I? (AKA, Am I willing to let this go, allow it to be here, or welcome it).
3. When? (When am I willing to let go, allow it to be here, or welcome it).
Questioning Metaphors
I actually haven't found a good existing process for questioning metaphors, nor have I
developed my own process. If you have done either of these things, let me know in
the comments, and I'll edit the post!

