
Cryonics Signup Guide
1. Cryonics signup guide #1: Overview
2. #2: Neurocryopreservation vs whole-body preservation
3. #3: Choosing a cryonics provider
4. #4: Introduction to life insurance for cryonics
5. #4.1: Types of life insurance
6. #4.2: Cryonics-friendly life insurance carriers
7. #4.3: Cryonics-friendly insurance agents
8. #4.4: The insurance underwriting process
9. #5: Making your cryonics arrangements oﬃcial
10. #6: Optional additional steps
11. Appendices to cryonics signup sequence

Cryonics signup guide #1: Overview
This is the introduction to a sequence on signing up for cryonics. In the coming posts I
will lay out what you need to do, concretely and in detail. This sequence is
intended for people who already think signing up for cryonics is a good idea
but are putting it oﬀ because they're not sure what they actually need to do next. I am
not going to address the question of how likely cryonics is to work - that's been
covered extensively elsewhere. 
If you have no idea what cryonics is, or if you want a thorough refresher, I recommend
WaitButWhy's Why Cryonics Makes Sense. 
Biases
This sequence is US-focused, since I went through the process in the US. It's also
somewhat Alcor-biased, since I chose Alcor quite early on in the process. However,
I've collaborated with both non-US cryonicists and people signed up with the Cryonics
Institute, so I'm conﬁdent there will be useful information no matter where you are or
which institution you choose to keep you in a vat of liquid nitrogen.
Epistemic status
I approached all questions in good faith and have documented my reasoning to the
best of my ability, but I don't have a high level of conﬁdence in my conclusions.
Commenter Josh Jacobson is signed up with the Cryonics Institute and had a very
diﬀerent experience than the one outlined in this sequence, and I don't think I have
any special knowledge or abilities that he doesn't. My recollections of the research
that led to these posts has also faded with time.
Caveats
This sequence was researched and written in late 2020, and just two years later, it
seems that the landscape has already changed signiﬁcantly. For example, Alcor has
changed their membership options, their fee structure, and their payment options,
and they've also introduced an online signup ﬂow that I have no experience with. As
such, please be aware that some of the logistical advice in this sequence may be
outdated. I have tried to update the sequence where possible, but I'm not going to go
through and overhaul it.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Connor Flexman, Daniel Filan, Gordon Worley, Mati Roy, Seraphina Nix, and
nameless others for letting me ask them endless questions. Thanks also to Eli Tyre
and Oge Nnadi for their previous writeups on this topic, from which I borrowed
liberally. 
Summary of the process
The ﬁrst thing most people probably want to know is: What do I do now? It turns out to
be really hard to ﬁgure this out, and I think unnecessarily so - the information is out

there, but it's not all written down clearly in one place. This sequence is my attempt to
rectify that. 
Basic process overview
Here is a basic overview of the cryonics signup process from start to ﬁnish:
1. Preliminary decisions
1. Neurocryopreservation vs whole-body cryopreservation
2. Cryonics Institute vs Alcor
2. Contact an agent to get life insurance
3. Fill out and submit cryonics membership application
4. Sign cryopreservation contract
5. Optional additional paperwork
6. Keep your policy and membership up-to-date forever
7. Be cryopreserved upon your legal death
For those who want to get oriented visually, here's a ﬂowchart covering the basics:


Sequence outline
And here is the outline of this sequence:
1. Introduction (you are here!)
2. Neurocryopreservation vs whole-body cryopreservation
3. Cryonics Institute vs Alcor
4. Intro to life insurance for cryonics
1. Types of life insurance
2. Cryonics-friendly life insurance carriers
3. Cryonics-friendly life insurance agents
4. The insurance underwriting process
5. Making it oﬃcial
6. Optional additional steps
7. Actually putting someone in cryostasis (possibly forthcoming late 2022)
8. Appendices
You may notice similarities to the process overview above, with the main diﬀerence
being an outsize focus on paperwork, and particularly life insurance. This is because
life insurance is a cesspool of bureaucratic bloat, and I wanted to lay things out really
clearly so that you can navigate it without crying as much as I did. Once you've
secured your funding method (whether that's life insurance or something else), the
rest of the process is very straightforward!
I think the preliminary decisions - on whole-body vs brain and which provider to use -
merit a fair amount of consideration as well. I've already made my decisions there, but
you may have diﬀerent cruxes than I do; the questions raised can get pretty
philosophical.
What I chose
If you just want to oﬄoad all of the complex decision-making to me (the person who
spent several months writing this sequence but has no other relevant qualiﬁcations), I
chose Alcor neuropreservation, which I funded by a $200,000 indexed universal life
insurance policy from Kansas City Life, with help from the insurance agent David
Donato. I made these choices as a fairly well-oﬀ 25-year-old female US citizen with no
major health problems and no history of drug use. If you are in a substantially
diﬀerent situation but still want to defer to my judgment, send me a DM and I can help
you ﬁgure out what's right for you.
Should I sign up?
Even though this sequence assumes you think cryonics is a good idea in the abstract,
you might be wondering if you, personally, should actually sign up for it, and if so
when. Below I'll discuss a couple factors that might help you make that decision.
Costs
Monetary cost

Cryonics is not just for rich people. It does cost money, but it's really not exorbitant,
especially if you're young and healthy. There's a wide range of possible costs
(corresponding to diﬀerent choices of cryonics provider or life insurance policy type)
that bottom out around $25 a month. I personally (25-year-old female, who did not
make decisions primarily based on price) pay about $240/month.
For most people, I think this cost is probably worth a small (but not inﬁnitesimal)
chance at immortality. Sure, if it's a choice between paying life insurance premiums
and having enough to eat, feed yourself ﬁrst. But if you're at all ﬁnancially secure, and
you think cryonics is a good idea but just haven't gotten around to signing up, I don't
think you should view the cost as a major deterrent.
Time cost
Signing up for cryonics takes a fair amount of time, even if you come in understanding
exactly what to do, and also oﬄoad the paperwork to an insurance agent. So if you're
busy with something very urgent - like, if you've been spending all your mental
energy this year advising national governments on their pandemic response measures
- then now is indeed probably not the best time to sign up. But if it's been like ﬁve
years and you always feel too busy to get around to it, I recommend just biting the
bullet and doing it now.
If you're not price-sensitive, you could pay someone to do nearly all of the work for
you, but you'd still have to hire that person, provide them with your personal
information for ﬁlling out forms, look over their decisions, sign papers, and potentially
submit to a medical exam. My guess is it'd be hard to get it below ~10 hours total.
If you're not willing or able to pay someone to go through the signup process for you,
expect more like ~40 hours. That's a signiﬁcant chunk of time, but not an
unmanageable one. 
Attention cost
The signup process just takes a while, even if you do everything right (Oge reports 11
weeks between seeking out a life insurance policy and receiving his medallions), and
so there's a sustained back-of-the-mind attention cost until it's over. Being signed up
for cryonics also requires a bit of ongoing maintenance (something I'll cover in a later
post), but not much more than, say, taking out a rental insurance policy does.
Now vs later
I know someone who signed up with Alcor in their twenties, and then the next year
was diagnosed with potentially fatal cancer. If they had waited any longer, they would
have been uninsurable, or in the best case, their life insurance premiums would have
been crazy, unaﬀordably high. As it turned out, they remain insured, grandfathered in
at their previous price. Sure this is just an anecdote, but it really drives home for me
that, while you may be at an age when it's statistically highly unlikely that you'll die,
it's never impossible.
All that's to say: If you think it's a good idea, do it now; don't put it oﬀ. If you're
uncertain whether it's a good idea, ﬁnd the root of your uncertainty and make a real
decision, rather than just indeﬁnitely driving at half-speed.

But I'm not in the US!
Not a problem! You can still sign up with Alcor or CI, and fund your membership using
life insurance, so nearly everything in this sequence will still apply to you.
If you're looking into the signup process and are not in the US (or need to work with
anyone outside of the US), I strongly recommend ﬁnding cryonicists in the relevant
country; they'll be able to help you with bureaucratic speciﬁcs more than I can. Here
are some links I found (disclaimer that I'm not endorsing any of these and they might
not even still exist):
Australasia
Belgium
Finland
Germany: Cryonics Germany, German Society for Applied Biostasis
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Portugal: Alcor Portugal, Cryonics Portugal
Québec
Southern hemisphere
Switzerland
UK
Likely-outdated email contact info for additional groups available here.
What's the lowest-eﬀort thing I can do
right now?
If you don't expect yourself to go through the full process right away for whatever
reason, but you want to increase your chances of cryopreservation in the event of
your death, you should sign a Declaration of Intent to Be Cryopreserved (form
here).
This constitutes informed consent, making it much more likely that it will be legally
possible to preserve you in case of an emergency. I expect this to take less than 30
minutes in total.
(Note: I previously recommended that people also become an Alcor Associate Member
, but as of September 2022 Alcor is no longer accepting new associate members.)
That's it for now! Stay tuned for many more posts that are very technical and much
longer than this, and please comment if you have any questions!

#2: Neurocryopreservation vs whole-
body preservation
This is post 2 of 10 in my sequence on how to sign up for cryonics.
Background
There are currently two options for human cryopreservation: preserving the whole
body, or preserving only the brain (and the head that holds it). Note that while
cryonics providers Alcor and KrioRus oﬀer both options, the Cryonics Institute only
oﬀers whole-body preservation.
This 1995 essay by a former Alcor president does a good job of laying out the
considerations that go into this decision. I'll go into many of those as well as some
additional considerations in this post. I'm primarily looking at:
1. The practical considerations of preserving a body vs just a brain, including
complexity, risk, cost, and preservation quality.
2. The biological and philosophical implications for one's personhood if the body is
discarded.
Note that many people argue that it will be easier for whole-body patients to resume
their lives and be reintroduced into society - perhaps so much easier that they'll be
woken up hundreds of years before neuropatients. I am not going to explore those
arguments here because I think it's unlikely that human bodies will be
necessary/useful at the time of waking. If you're interested in a discussion of that
topic, see Mati Roy's "How much harder is it to revive a neuro-only cryonics patient?"
Arguments for neuropreservation
From Alcor's FAQ: "Brains are compact, inexpensive to store, easy to move, and are a
single organ for which cryopreservation protocols can be completely optimized." That
is, if you focus on preserving just the brain, you can do a better job with the initial
cryopreservation, and maintain preservation less expensively, and with less risk, for
the long years until revival.
Higher-quality preservation
There are reasonable arguments that neurosuspension might result in better
preservation than whole-body, and this is a crux for me. However, note that these
arguments rest on facts that only happen to be true today. If and when cryonics
technology progresses to a point where a person can be preserved indeﬁnitely with no
damage whatsoever (some people call this 'true suspended animation'), then this
consideration will entirely disappear.
There are many advantages when the perfusion team can exclusively focus on the
head, because cryopreservation protocols can be completely optimized for survival of

the brain[1]. Some speciﬁc advantages include:
Shorter perfusion times (sources: 1, 2)
Faster cooling to temperatures where biological and chemical activity are halted
(1)
Better venous return of the cryoprotectant (2)
Absence of problems due to abdominal edema
Potential access to new, more advanced preservation technologies before whole
body patients (3)
However, note that you can theoretically get the best of both worlds (emphasis mine):
A rejoinder to this argument is that one does not need to choose
neuropreservation to receive these advantages. One could preferentially
cryopreserve the isolated head and after this procedure cryopreserve the rest of
the body. In fact, as of this writing, the default procedure at the Cryonics Institute
is to perform cryoprotective perfusion with a vitriﬁcation agent for the upper body
and give the rest of the body a straight freeze. At Alcor it is possible to execute a
contract that provides for separate cryopreservation of the head and the body. So
it is not accurate to say that one needs to exclude the cryopreservation of the
body to get a superior cryopreservation. (source)
With Alcor, it's also possible to get funding for whole-body, but leave a note on your
ﬁle saying that Alcor can choose the best option based on the circumstances of your
demise.
Lower cost relative to whole-body
preservation
Assuming you are already set on Alcor (or KrioRus), neuropreservation is substantially
cheaper than whole-body preservation - half the price or less. This is primarily (though
not solely) because of diﬀering storage costs. Via Alcor:
All of the patients are stored in liquid nitrogen at -320 F [-196 C]. No matter how
well insulated, liquid nitrogen is constantly evaporating and returning to the air.
We have to add more nitrogen to the dewars each week. Alcor has to pay a local
supplier for this liquid. One of our steel Bigfoot dewars boils oﬀ about 12-15 liters
of nitrogen per day, whether it contains one whole body patient or the maximum
of four. Each neurosuspension dewar (inside a concrete vault) holds nine patients
and loses nitrogen at only half the rate of the whole-body units. This means the
nitrogen cost per neuropatient is only about one-ninth of the cost per whole-body
patient.[2]
There are many other factors in the storage costs that are more evenly divided
between neuro and whole-body patients, so the total diﬀerence is not 1/9; but it is
still large. To ensure enough principal in the Patient Care Fund so that the earnings
can cover expenses, we invest $70,000 (at least) of the suspension funding for
whole body patients. We only have to invest about $17,000 to achieve the same
result for neuropatients.
Neuropreservation may also be less subject to cost increases than whole-body. This is
an impression I've gotten from multiple sources but haven't seen a very explicit model

for. One suggestion is that whole-body has more room for cost increases due to
technological innovation, because body perfusion and preservation is less advanced
and less explored than brain preservation. I've also seen claims that Alcor whole-body
preservation is currently underpriced.
Emergency evacuation
Again, via Alcor:
Neuropatients are also easier to transport in an emergency. The Bigfoot units are
about nine feet tall, weigh almost 2 1/2 tons, and take several people to move.
However, we can quickly move the neuropatients to small, individual dewars that
can be placed in the back of a van or pickup truck and handled easily by two
people.
In a major emergency, Alcor would convert whole body patients to neuropatients, and
evacuate them in the same way. However, this would take extra time, decreasing your
odds of survival. 
While emergency transportation has rarely come up so far in cryonics history, it's not
a stretch to imagine that, over timescales of a hundred years or more, a natural
disaster might threaten the facility where you're being stored.
Arguments for whole-body
preservation
See The Case for Whole-Body if you want someone to do their best to convince you to
sign up for whole-body; I'm here to explain, not persuade.
Lower cost in absolute terms
If you are price-sensitive above all else, you're likely to choose the Cryonics Institute
for your cryopreservation (more on this decision in the next post), since it charges
$28,000 for whole-body suspension[3], compared to Alcor's $80,000 neurosuspension
or $200,000 whole-body suspension. Since the Cryonics Institute only oﬀers whole-
body preservation, making your decision based primarily on price de facto means
choosing whole-body.
Compensating for damage to the preserved
brain
From The Case for Whole-Body: 
If we... allow for some degree of ischemia or brain damage during
cryopreservation... the rest of the body could be used to infer information about
the non-damaged state of the brain, an option not available to neuropatients.

Recently, research has been conducted to understand the "microbiome" and the
alleged interaction between gut bacteria and the brain. One does not need to
believe that the microbiome is part of the (peripheral) nervous system to
recognize that its preservation (and gut bacteria in particular) may provide clues
about the brain, (past) mental states, and could be useful to resolve ambiguous
brain repair challenges.
The essay doesn't specify how any of this might work, but then again, we by necessity
never specify how revival might work beyond "advanced nanomedicine." The claim
seems a priori plausible to me.
Potential cognition outside of the brain
From The Neuropreservation Option:
Certainly a whole body patient takes more total information along into the future,
although it is still hard to say how signiﬁcant the added information is. For some
people, the pattern of nerve growth development in the body may be very
important to their identity — for a dancer or musician, for instance. On the other
hand, enough of that information may be encoded in brain development that the
same result can be achieved either way. We don't know yet; so we can't say for
sure if you are risking anything by leaving your body behind.
This feels like a crux for me, so I want to drill down into it - it seems to me that the
bulk of the considerations point in favor of neuropreservation (given current
technology), but if it's true that by choosing neuro I'd be leaving important parts of
myself behind, that would tip the scales in favor of whole-body for me.
While there's deﬁnitely uncertainty here that hasn't been resolved by contemporary
science, we can at least bring some evidence to bear. Fortuitously, I found out that my
friend Eli had already done a little bit of research and thinking in this area, and he
agreed to let me use his work. The next three sections were almost entirely written
and researched by him, with only some minor edits by me.
Does important cognition happen
outside of the brain?
Note from Eli: I did spend a couple of hours trying to follow up on evidence related to
this question, but I deﬁnitely deﬁnitely don't feel like I solidly "ﬁgured it out". The
following is more like a survey of the evidence that I happened to ﬁnd. I do think there
is space for a person to do a more dedicated research project here (on the order of 30
or 40 hours), and get more clarity.
Background
Proponents of whole-body preservation suggest that important personality-relevant
information is stored in the rest of the body, not just the brain, and suggest that it
might be shortsighted to not preserve that information.

From my layman's understanding, this is at least plausible: the body is composed of
multiple overlapping systems, such as the endocrine system, the immune system, the
peripheral nervous system, and the enteric nervous system, each of which has some
function analogous to memory, and which interact with each other in complex
cascades. (Not to mention almost all the cells, in all the tissues in your body, which
adaptively adjust the mix of receptors on their membranes, depending on the
chemical soup that those cells are exposed to.)
Therefore it wouldn't be that surprising to me (again, as a layman) if, when you isolate
the brain from all of those systems, you are leaving behind an important fraction of a
patient's personhood.
Which option is preferable depends on a number of factors, but surely one major crux
is "How much personality-relevant information is stored in organs or organ systems
other than the brain?" This is a tricky question to answer for a number of reasons,
both scientiﬁc and philosophical. I want to investigate the easiest line of attack I can
think of: "Do paraplegics experience personality changes as a result of their spinal
trauma?" 
This seems like the easiest line of attack, because the spine is an organ outside of the
brain, that we know has the capacity for learning, and which has a pretty well-deﬁned
channel of interaction with the brain.
If we ﬁnd that paraplegics do suﬀer (permanent) personality changes, that would be
pretty signiﬁcant evidence that personality-relevant information is contained in the
rest of the body, even if it is only in the spine.
If we ﬁnd no evidence of personality change in paraplegics, that would be some
evidence in favor of most or all of the important personality-relevant info being in the
brain, but it would hardly be conclusive, since there are a bunch of other systems that
could constitute an important, idiosyncratic part of "personhood."
Nevertheless, this seems like the best place to start. So, I did a lit review to see what I
could ﬁnd on the topic.
Evidence from spinal trauma patients
I struggled to ﬁnd evidence relevant to this question.
The ﬁrst problem is that while there are a number of papers about personality
disorders in spinal cord injury (SCI) patients, they seem to be due to selection eﬀects -
for instance, aggressive, impulsive risk-takers are far more likely to be involved in
activities that might result in a SCI. I have yet to ﬁnd any studies that do a before and
after analysis on a person who suﬀered from a spinal cord injury. One paper got close
to that by comparing the personality assessment of veterans with SCI, to the
personality assessment of their identical twins. They found "no evidence that SCI is
associated with long-term personality change." But also, the sample size was only 11
pairs of twins.
The second problem is that paraplegics' lives change radically following their injury. To
get proper evidence, we would need to distinguish between personality changes that
are the result of their change in circumstances, vs personality change that is a direct
result of physical trauma.

Biological mechanisms of personality change
Since the evidence from SCI patients was so scarce, I decided to switch to looking into
our models of how personality change via brain damage happens. Here is some of
what I found.
"Personality changes" primarily refer to changes in the emotional responses to
stimulus. Most often this seems to take the form of disimprovement in emotional
regulation: increased irritability, anger, or frustration, and decreased impulse control.
For instance, take the famous case of Phineas Gage, who had a railroad spike driven
through his frontal lobe in an accident:
Gage's employers... "considered the change in his mind so marked that they could
not give him his place again.... He is ﬁtful, irreverent,... impatient of restraint or
advice when it conﬂicts with his desires.... His mind was radically changed, so
decidedly that his friends and acquaintances said he was 'no longer Gage.'"
(source)
However, sometimes aﬀective reactions shift in less predictable ways. For instance,
brain injury victim Oliver Mitchard reports:
Before my accident, I wasn't fond of animals or monkeys - no creatures at all.
Since my accident I've got a massive passion for monkeys, which bizarrely, has
literally come out of nowhere.
It seems like the best theory to describe this is that when the connections between
the limbic system and the cerebral cortex are damaged, and forced to regrow, this can
cause changes to the patterns that allow us to evaluate our emotional responses and
regulate our behavior. (Note from mingyuan: while the sources I could ﬁnd on this are
not exactly the height of scientiﬁc legitimacy, it still seems plausible to me.) 
That is, personality changes are attributed to the brain alone, with no involvement
from the central or enteric nervous systems. Any personality changes due to spinal or
abdominal trauma would need to posit a totally new biological mechanism.
Eli's part is over now, back to me.
Other evidence
Former Alcor president Mike Darwin commented on this issue back in 2012, focusing
on several examples not covered by Eli:
First, Darwin points out that there are major personality changes and other cognitive
changes entailed in aging, and we generally don't think of these as compromising a
person's self. (Think aging as in age 25 to age 35, rather than aging as in dementia.) I
think this is pretty uncontroversial - I certainly have diﬀerent emotional reactions to
stimuli than I would have 10 years ago, but nobody questions my continuity of
consciousness.
Second, he claims that he knows plenty of people who have had their intestines and
stomach (where many extra neurons are located) removed, but didn't undergo any

perceptible cognitive changes.
I actually found a ton of anecdotal evidence that stomach surgery can lead to
signiﬁcant personality change. But again, it's hard to separate eﬀects of the surgery
itself from everything that surrounds it. Losing 100+ pounds will have massive eﬀects
on your social and mental life whether it involves surgery or not, as will being
diagnosed with gastric cancer (weight loss and cancer are the two reasons people get
stomach surgery). You also have to make permanent, signiﬁcant changes to your
eating behaviors after stomach surgery, which can aﬀect all sorts of things (e.g. blood
sugar and hormone levels, habits and coping mechanisms, general enjoyment of life).
Finally, Darwin points out that in successful organ transplants, donor immune and
stem cells colonize the patient, but the patients don't undergo perceptible cognitive
changes - despite the fact that the makeup of their 'chemical soup' (to use Eli's
phrase) has changed signiﬁcantly.
A quick search on my part turned up a couple papers and plenty of anecdotes
suggesting that a small subset of organ recipients do report personality changes that
they attribute to their transplant. While that seems plausible to me a priori, I'm
distinctly unimpressed with the research - there's no proposed mechanism and it all
feels more spiritual than scientiﬁc. (Search term: 'cellular memory theory'.)
Oh no, philosophy
It turns out that the fact that personal identity is poorly deﬁned makes it really hard to
say what information is identity-relevant, and therefore it's hard to decide whether
your brain in isolation would still be you. I think we're running into something like a
Ship of Theseus problem here - how many pieces of what makes me me can be taken
away before I'm no longer me?
Another way to look at it is that personalities are already dynamic, and so it becomes
a matter of personal judgment what kinds of personality changes are within
acceptable limits, and which are not. Some dimensions on which personality changes
appear to vary are:
Magnitude - It's easier to accept small changes than large ones. The changes
in Phineas Gage were very large, but if someone ended up only 5% more
irritable or impulsive after an accident, you might not even notice.
Abruptness - It's easier to accept gradual changes than abrupt ones. You
undergo gradual changes in personality as you age. You can get abrupt changes
if you experience a traumatic brain injury.
Externalness - It's easier to accept internal changes than external ones. An
organ transplant or a rod through the head are clearly external. Meditating is
clearly internal. Taking antidepressants or hanging out with new friends are
borderline.
Type - It's easier to accept positive or neutral changes than negative ones.
Contrast Phineas Gage's aggression and impulsiveness to Oliver Mitchard's
newfound passion for monkeys.
Mati suggests thinking in terms of "the things you intrinsically want to preserve about
yourself" - which again, is a matter of personal judgment. The only thing I can really
pin down is that I want continuity of consciousness - I want to keep my memories and
my sense of being myself. But surely I wouldn't be satisﬁed with a person with all of

my memories, but who reacted diﬀerently from me to every conceivable stimulus. In
short, this is all very confusing, oh no.
Conclusions
Eli's conclusion
This is non academic, but I can say that as I continued looking into this, I found an
increasing inclination to cryopreserve my whole body. Importantly, the update was not
that there's strong evidence to think that personality-relevant information is stored in
the brain, but rather, it was (re-)made salient to me how little we know about how
brains and minds work. 
Given how little we know, it seems like epistemic arrogance to conﬁdently assert that
(and bet on) there being negligible biological personality-relevant info outside of the
brain. The precautionary principle argues in favor of not leaning on that fact for "my"
survival. 
ETA: It seems worth noting that I have opted for neuropreservation instead of full
body, at least at this time, in large part due to price diﬀerence. The "inclination to
cryopreserve my full body" noted above, was not suﬃcient to sway my choice. What
seems ideal to me would be doing both: remove the head from the body, and then
cryopreserve, and store, them both separately. This would give you the beneﬁt of a
faster perfusion of the brain and ease of transport in an emergency, but also keeps
the rest of the body around on the oﬀ-chance that it contains personality-relevant info.
My conclusion
Every line of inquiry so far has failed to suggest that any important aspects of
personality are located anywhere except the brain. Absence of evidence is (weak)
evidence of absence - especially given that this is not the ﬁrst time I've been in a
context where I needed to know whether anything other than the brain was important
for identity and cognition. 
Given that the bulk of the considerations - cost, emergency risk, and most
importantly, preservation quality - are in favor of neuropreservation, and I haven't
seen any compelling reason to switch to favoring whole-body, I am choosing
neuropreservation for myself and my family members. It seems to me that, as of
this writing, neuro gives the best chance for future revival.
However, I think it's quite likely that cryopreservation technology will advance enough
in my lifetime that it will at some point make sense to switch to whole-body. So I
recommend signing up for neuropreservation, but with a high enough funding amount
that you can easily switch to whole-body in the future without needing to purchase
additional life insurance. More on this when I cover life insurance in two weeks.
 
1. ^

"The quality of brain preservation in whole body patients may not be as good as
for neuropatients. Cryoprotectant absorption of the entire body is measured
during whole body cryopreservation. During neuropreservation, cryoprotectant
absorption of each brain hemisphere is individually measured and optimized
without interference from the rest of the body." (source)
2. ^
This calculation appears to assume that whole-body dewars store an average of
two patients rather than the maximum of four. I'm not sure why this is.
3. ^
The $28,000 ﬁgure is somewhat misleading, as I'll discuss in depth next week.

#3: Choosing a cryonics provider
This is post 3 of 10 in my sequence on how to sign up for cryonics.
There are a fair few companies working in or adjacent to the cryonics space, but so far as I
can tell*, the most commonly considered ones are: 
Alcor near Phoenix
The Cryonics Institute (CI) near Detroit (whole-body only)
KrioRus in Moscow
I only seriously considered Alcor and CI, which is the case for most people I know, since
KrioRus is 6000 miles away from us. 
Edit 9/2022: I've heard good things about Tomorrow Biostasis, based in Germany and
serving all of Europe. Given that most Europeans probably currently can't / don't want to deal
with Moscow, this seems like a good alternative to look into.
Honestly, I chose Alcor long before I started the signup process - basically because my
friends had chosen it, and I ﬁgured they'd done so for good reason. But in the interest of
information-sharing (which is the whole reason I'm writing this sequence, after all), I decided
to dig into the Alcor vs CI question. I came out the other side more conﬁdent in my choice of
Alcor.
Process
The ﬁrst thing I did was to look back into ancient history, to this 2012 LessWrong question
about Alcor vs CI. While the comments did raise a lot of important considerations and were a
helpful starting point, the primary thing I found out was.... that there's a lot of catﬁghting in
the cryonics community. Here's hoping this post attracts more constructive feedback and
fewer diatribes.
Notably, I did not reach out to either Alcor or CI directly, instead working only from publicly
available information. While I'm told that people at both organizations are very helpful and
happy to answer questions, I think it's illuminating to see what they share publicly. Also,
honestly, I just don't like talking to people and didn't want to devote that much time and
energy to looking into minutiae, when the broader picture was already pretty clear to me.
People who have insider information are welcome to set me straight when I raise questions
or reveal gaps in my knowledge.
One more note
While people argue a lot about which organization is better for them at the individual level, I
think it's good to acknowledge that all cryonics organizations are part of the same
ecosystem that's pushing research forward and aiming at long-term human ﬂourishing. In
this capacity, cryonics organizations all complement one another. People seem to get really
caught up in the narcissism of small diﬀerences and lose sight of the fact that cryonicists, by
and large, all share the same values.
Costs to the consumer
CI is usually cited as the cheaper option, but I became increasingly uncertain about this as I
looked into it. If you look just at their preservation prices, then you come away thinking that
the cost of whole-body preservation via Alcor is more than 7x what it is via CI. But this is

misleading, because Alcor rolls standby and transportation costs into its signup fees, while CI
doesn't. 
Ultimately CI does come out cheaper overall, but the cost diﬀerence may not be as stark as
it ﬁrst appears. Let's get into it.
Alcor
As of this writing, Alcor charges a minimum of $80,000 for neuropreservation and $200,000
for whole-body. Here's a breakdown of the full costs:
One-time application fee: $300
Standby fees: $180/year (waived if you overfund your life insurance policy by
$20,000, which you should do anyway) = $0/month
Membership dues: $15 x (age at time of sign up) / year = $22-$75/month (median
~$44/month)
Life insurance premiums (neuro): $15-$300/month (median ~$100/month)
Life insurance premiums (whole-body): $30-$600/month (median ~$200/month)
So, if you are healthy and under ~35, your monthly fees are likely to come out to about
$150 for neuro or $250 for whole-body. Note that you get signiﬁcantly discounted
application fees and membership dues if someone else in your immediate family is already
signed up for Alcor. If this applies to you, your monthly fees will be $23 lower!
(You may be wondering why there's such a wide range of life insurance premium costs. I will
talk a whole lot more about life insurance in later posts, but in brief, your premiums depend
heavily on the type of insurance you decide to buy, and also increase steeply with your age.)
Cryonics Institute
First let's do the same calculation we just did for Alcor. CI's minimum whole-body suspension
fee is $28,000, but if you're an Annual Member rather than a Lifetime Member, it's actually
$35,000. But I don't think it actually matters that much, since as far as I can tell, it's hard to
take out a life insurance policy for less than $50,000. So your life insurance premiums end up
being pretty much the same either way.
Annual Membership:
One-time initiation fee: $75
Membership dues: $120/year = $10/month
Life insurance premiums: $8-$300/month (median ~$100/month)
Lifetime Membership:
One-time initiation fee: $0
Membership dues: $1250 once, amortized over ~50 years = ~$2/month
Life insurance premiums: $8-$300/month (median ~$100/month)
So your fees come out to about $100/month if you're an Annual Member, or $110/month if
you're a Lifetime Member. 
But wait! Unlike for Alcor, it doesn't end there! Behold:

  
You can see that if you want standby and transportation, you'll end up needing to pay an
extra $60,000, for a total of about $90,000 - on par with signing up for Alcor neuro. 
When is CI cheaper?
If you already have life insurance through your employer
CI accepts funding via employer-sponsored group life insurance, while Alcor doesn't. If you
can get your employer to pay for your life insurance you'll have a much cheaper out-of-
pocket cost. (Note that Suspended Animation does not accept group insurance, so you'll still
have to ﬁgure out standby costs.)
If you're 100% set on whole-body 
If you're signing up for whole-body preservation regardless of provider, then preservation via
Alcor still costs twice as much as preservation via CI, even taking into account the extra
standby and transportation fees that CI members pay to Suspended Animation.
If you do not want standby  
All of CI's 'hidden costs' are for standby and transportation. If you are making your own
arrangements in this domain, then it doesn't make sense to pay Alcor's mandatory standby
fees. There are three main reasons you might not want standby:

You live in the Detroit area, so you're likely to already be very close to CI when you
die.
You're contracting with a local standby team and/or funeral director -
especially likely if you're outside of North America, since Alcor and Suspended
Animation are primarily set up to operate in the US and Canada.
You think centralized standby doesn't work .
Quality of cryopreservation
There are two main factors that determine the quality of your cryopreservation:
1. How quickly preservation happens after your clinical death
2. What preservation methods are used
I'll go into both of these below. For a sense of how things actually go down in real-world, non-
idealized situations, you can see CI's cryopreservation case reports here or Alcor's here.
Standby services
What is standby?
When you're close to death, you (or your loved ones) may call for a team of trained
individuals to wait at your bedside, ready to stabilize you and get you ready for
cryopreservation and (if needed) transportation, as soon as you're pronounced legally dead.
Why does standby matter?
Standby exists so that you can get cooled down and cryopreserved as quickly as possible.
Speed is important because your organs degrade quickly after you stop breathing and your
heart stops beating. 
You'll hear the word "ischemia" used in this context. Ischemia refers to deﬁcient blood ﬂow to
part of the body - in this case the whole body, but we primarily care about the brain - and
the resulting oxygen shortage. Organs without oxygen are quickly damaged (see Wikipedia if
you're interested in the mechanism), and importantly, this interferes with the
cryopreservation process:
One of the most robust ﬁndings in our studies, and scientiﬁc papers of others
researchers going back to the 1960s, is that cerebral ischemia produces perfusion
impairment in the brain in a time- and temperature dependent manner. In cryonics such
perfusion impairment translates itself into ice formation. The real diﬀerence is not
between Alcor and CI but between people who do not receive rapid stabilization and
cooling and those who do. (source)
Cryonicists often talk about "ischemic time", which refers (roughly) to the duration of time
between your legal death and your cryopreservation. In cryonics, you can incur either warm
ischemia (at room temperature) or cold ischemia (cooled down). Cold ischemia is less bad
than warm ischemia, because being colder slows down the degradation process, but it's still
ischemia. The shorter your ischemic time, the better.
How does standby work?
Standby teams aim to intervene as soon as possible after the pronouncement of legal death,
to minimize ischemic time. Once death is pronounced, they stabilize the patient by lowering
body temperature and restoring circulation. They also administer medications intended to
improve the quality of cryopreservation (e.g. heparin to avert blood clots). 

Perfusion can be done near the location of legal death ('ﬁeld perfusion') but is usually done
at the preservation facilities. This means that, for anyone who undergoes clinical death while
not located right near their cryonics provider, there are hours and often even days between
clinical death and the beginning of perfusion.
See this case report from Suspended Animation for a complete picture of the standby
process.
Hospice care
A friend who recently helped cryopreserve a family member told me "The best quality
preservations by far occur in hospice death near the perfusion team." This is because being
near the perfusion team and preservation facility allows for the quickest preservation
following clinical death, and the least ischemic time. 
Alcor strongly encourages members who are terminally ill to relocate to a care facility near
Alcor; if you choose to do so, their standby program entitles you to relocation assistance of
up to $10,000. 
A cooperative care center is important, because some hospices will refuse to allow the
standby team into the room or try to block them from acting. Alcor has a relationship with a
hospice in Scottsdale, Arizona. CI does not have a relationship with a hospice. For my friend,
this meant he wasn't able to relocate his family member to Michigan in their ﬁnal days. He
did contract with Suspended Animation, but his family member still incurred signiﬁcant cold
ischemia while being ﬂown to Michigan.
Mandatory vs optional standby
As mentioned in the previous section, on costs, CI does not make standby mandatory for its
members, while Alcor does. Alcor "attempts to provide bedside standby service to all
members in the U.S. and Canada [subject to a 180 day waiting period after signup]" (source),
and paying into its standby program is mandatory for Alcor members.
CI members can get standby and transport services from Suspended Animation by paying a
fee, but in practice, only about 30% of CI members choose this option.[1]
CI makes a good point that "Spending large sums of money for remote standby services...
does not guarantee a successful suspension." However, I think a major hole in their standby
philosophy is that, while personalized, decentralized local standby is likely better than the
'one-size-ﬁts-all' centralized standby provided by Suspended Animation (at least in terms of
average response times), almost no one is going to go to the trouble to set up their own
standby solution. So the default for a CI member is to have no standby at all, which seems
obviously worse than centralized standby.
Perfusion
Alcor and CI both aim to vitrify their patients rather than just straight freezing them, a
process that signiﬁcantly reduces damage to the organs. However, the two organizations
perfuse their patients with diﬀerent vitriﬁcation solutions, and that's what I'll be looking into
here.
Alcor
Alcor pitches itself as performing state-of-the-art cryopreservation. I'll just quote from their
FAQ:
The cryoprotectant used by Alcor, M22, was developed for purposes of medical organ
banking and transplantation. It was the ﬁrst solution to ever permit the cryopreservation

and subsequent long-term survival of a vital mammalian organ (kidney). M22 is a "6th
generation" vitriﬁcation solution, incorporating ice blockers, chilling injury protection,
and numerous other insights...
[M22] is able to vitrify at slower cooling rates, and larger volumes, than any other
vitriﬁcation solution in published scientiﬁc literature...
Alcor also uses demanding "closed circuit" perfusion, the same method of circulating
ﬂuids through the body used in heart surgery and organ cryopreservation research. This
permits cryoprotectant to be introduced more gently, with better temperature control,
without requiring cryoprotectant concentration in blood vessels to be far above target
tissue concentration.
Cryonics Institute
CI pitches itself as performing aﬀordable cryopreservation. They use a vitriﬁcation agent that
they developed in-house, called VM-1. While there are no scientiﬁc journal publications about
VM-1, this LessWrong comment goes into M22 vs VM-1 a bit (linked page available here). CI
also discusses their perfusion process here (scroll to the bottom). Most relevant paragraph:
[VM-1 inventor] Dr. Pichugin believes that the combination of his vitriﬁcation solution and
carrier solution are well optimized for both low viscosity and minimal expense, while
providing powerful vitriﬁcation capability. He does not believe in the value of high
molecular mass agents such as proteins, dextrans, HES, PVP, etc, to support oncotic
pressure in brain perfusion in CI's protocol because he believes these agents increase
viscosity and are not necessary due to the dehydrating eﬀect of cryoprotectants. In
practice the Cryonics Institute has not seen much brain edema or the need for oncotic
support in perfusions of brains with CI−VM−1 and [the carrier solution] m−RPS−2.
CI later mentions keeping costs low by using industrial-grade cryoprotectants. Their focus on
costs and their description of VM-1 make me inclined to believe Alcor when they say, "VM1
was developed as a solution of simple composition for economical cryonics, not preservation
of organs for transplantation." I haven't seen positive evidence that VM-1 will allow for
revival.
A comment from the 2012 thread says that CI "cryoprotects only the head, allowing the rest
of the body to be straight frozen with massive damage", but I think this is no longer true.
While head-only perfusion is still the default, CI members can now choose to have their body
perfused as well - although CI recommends against it because "body perfusion with glycerol
after having perfused the brain results in longer brain exposure to cryoprotectant toxicity
and ischemic damage."
Organizational longevity
Organizational failure is the number two reason I expect cryonics not to work, with number
one being existential catastrophe that wipes out all of humanity. I'm far from conﬁdent that
any cryonics company is prepared to weather a couple hundred years, black swan events
and all.
The actions Alcor has taken - choosing a low-risk location, planning their ﬁnances for the
long term, and structuring their organization so that it's not in imminent danger of falling
apart - do show that they've seriously considered the problem of organizational longevity,
but I'm not convinced that they're prepared for the future to be... weird. 
Relevant 2012 comment from LessWrong user shminux:

To quote Peter Lynch, "I want to buy a company any fool can run, because eventually one
will". Making a company fool-proof is essential when the main purpose of the company is
to survive several hundred years (maybe even thousands), an exceedingly rare
occurrence. None of the current cryo shops seem anywhere close to having the
necessary structure in place.
Alcor
For an overview of measures Alcor has taken in pursuit of institutional longevity, see pages
4-8 here.
Company structure
Alcor has a self-perpetuating board (which means that the board votes on who will be on the
board) that's made up solely of Alcor members, which makes it pretty hard for any hostile
outsiders to take over the organization.
Financially, Alcor has made sure not to put all of its eggs in one basket. It has its main
operating funds, some reserve funds, an endowment, and the Alcor Care Trust (formerly the
Patient Care Trust), and there are set rules for when and how each of those funds is touched.
For example, the Alcor Care Trust has separate assets and a separate board of directors, and
is supported by a 501(c)(3) distinct from Alcor. This makes it so that Alcor can't dip into
patient care funds in order to cover other costs, such as legal fees. 
These precautions seem pretty good overall, but it doesn't necessarily seem like Alcor is
prepared for extreme events like the collapse of the US dollar, or widespread and enduring
violent unrest in the United States.    
Long-term ﬁnancial planning
We'll go into ﬁnances more in the next section, but it's worth taking a look at how Alcor
responds to point-blank questions (in its own FAQ). In answer to the question "How will Alcor
sustain itself for the duration of my cryopreservation?"
Alcor's long-term planning is conservative. Minimum funding requirements budget
$115,000 to be set aside to fund long-term care of whole body patients, and $25,000 for
neuropatients. Any excess funding also goes toward long-term care unless the member
speciﬁes otherwise. As a result, Alcor has more funding set aside per volume of patients
under care than any other organization by a wide margin.
Alcor also segregates long-term care funds in the Patient Care Trust (PCT), which has a
separate board of directors that oversees investments and ensures PCT funds are only
used for long-term patient care... The Trust holds the mortgage of the building housing
Alcor patients as well as majority interest in the ownership of the building.  The rest of
the Trust investments are held at the investment ﬁrm of Morgan Stanley...
...Using a conservative estimate, the funds should generate more than enough money to
cover patient maintenance indeﬁnitely.
Location
Alcor intentionally chose a location with very low natural disaster risk, a low crime rate, good
weather (to avoid transportation delays), and access to a major airport (the facilities are a
20-30 minute drive from Phoenix's international airport). In addition, Alcor's facilities have
good security, and police response times in the area are quick. 
Cryonics Institute

CI is pretty open about the fact that they have no plans whatsoever. From their FAQ:
Can you guarantee success? 
Sadly, we can't. No one can guarantee success, because no one can guarantee the
future. No one can predict scientiﬁc progress with certainty. We believe that a very
strong case can be made for the probable success of cryonics. But that doesn't mean
that social disruptions aren't possible. Nuclear war, economic collapse, political strife and
terrorism, are all possible, and they could end the lives of cryopreserved patients just as
easily as they can end the lives of any of us.
and
Can you guarantee the safety of patients?
The oldest patient currently still being held in cryopreservation is Dr. James Bedford, who
was cryopreserved in 1967. He has survived the Cold War, the Vietnam War, the Gulf
War, Watergate, the collapse of the Soviet Union and the 9/11 attacks — which is more
than many of his contemporaries can say. The world is (relatively) stable at the moment,
global world war doesn't seem likely, and the economy is relatively stable.
We can't guarantee the future. But we can and do guarantee this: that at CI we will give
our very best eﬀorts to see our member patients are restored to life and good health.
The life of every director and oﬃcer and member of CI depends on those same eﬀorts.
It's also worth noting that I didn't ﬁnd anything about long-term ﬁnancial planning on their
website, and that their location is not optimized along the lines of Alcor's - while CI is very
near a major airport (again, a 20-30 minute drive), it's also just outside the infamously high-
crime Detroit, and Michigan is subject to a fair number of natural disasters. (Michigan might
not get many earthquakes, but it does regularly get thunderstorms and blizzards, which
frequently cause delays both at airports and on roads.)
No but actually??
shminux made an excellent point back in 2012 that I have yet to see addressed anywhere. I
think it's worth quoting in full:
[M]y biggest concern is the continuous operation of a cryoshop over the potential
centuries or even millennia until the revival is attempted, as nearly no entities have ever
survived that long. I have been unsuccessful in my search for an Alcor executive
explicitly responsible for existential risk analysis and mitigation.
By existential risk to the company I mean an event that would result in the company
failing to the degree that the stored patients are discarded, even though the outside
world merrily hums along, and not an event that wipes out a large chunk of humanity.
The FAQ does not seem to answer the obvious hard questions like "what if Morgan
Stanley goes under?", "what if the US dollar collapses?", "what other existential risks
exist, and what are their probability estimates and error bars?", "what is the estimated
lifetime of Alcor until it suﬀers a complete failure from one of the existential risks to it
coming to pass?" etc. By the way, if you think that the answer to the last question is
"inﬁnite", I recommend a basic probability and statistics course.
In other words, the risk management appears to be at the level no better than that of a
regular insurance company, which is completely inadequate for an organization whose
long-term survival is the most critical issue. Is this perception wrong?
Seems right to me.

Finances
(Please help make this section better! Finances are not my forte [2] )
The fundamental ﬁnancial need of a cryonics organization is to be able to pay for the
preservation and indeﬁnite storage of its members. To do this, they have to balance
[charging high enough prices that they get enough money per person to cover costs] and
[charging low enough prices that they can attract new members and retain old ones]. They
should also be conservative in their planning, and wise in their spending and investment.
Responses to inﬂation
Cryonics Institute
CI has not raised its prices since it was founded in 1976.[3] This makes me extremely
nervous. CI themselves point out[4] that not charging enough can bankrupt a cryoshop, and I
don't see why they're not more worried about that for themselves. 
Sure, CI's expenses have stayed constant and quite low over the past ~15 years, but it still
seems like bad ﬁnancial planning to keep costs the same over a period that's seen 363%
inﬂation! More than anything, eating continuously decreasing real costs for 45 years
indicates to me that CI isn't taking long-term planning seriously.
This is what it looks like to keep costs at $28,000 starting in 1976:
Alcor
Alcor has raised its prices multiple times since its founding, and even they are struggling to
keep up with inﬂation. Here's a history of Alcor's cost increases that Mati Roy and I pieced
together from this essay and the Wayback Machine:

 
Neuro minimum Whole-body minimum Inﬂation rate since then
1976 $25,000
$60,000
254%
1982 $35,000
$100,000
127%
1991 $45,000
$120,000
68%
1994 $50,000
$120,000
57%
2005 $80,000
$150,000
27%
2011 $80,000
$200,000
12%
And here's what that looks like inﬂation-adjusted:
You can see that Alcor has kept real costs fairly steady over time - and that it's due for
another increase soon. Dues and application fees have followed a similar pattern of
periodically adjusting upwards for inﬂation, though those adjustments are smaller and more
frequent.
Alcor previously had a policy of grandfathering members in at the prices at their time of
signup, but this policy is no longer in force, which I think is a wise ﬁnancial decision on their
part.
Investments & assets
I'll continue to disclaim that I'm not very ﬁnancially savvy, but it seems to me, just as a basic
sanity check, that if an organization is being smart about its investments, its assets should
grow over time.
I graphed the assets of both companies for the most recent 13 years, excluding restricted
assets as well as property and equipment (it's really bad if they liquidate their property and
equipment). Data is taken from public ﬁnancial statements (Alcor, CI).

As you can see, both organizations passed my sanity check. Both have seen their assets
grow at an average of 12.4% per year since 2011 (I excluded the years before that because
of the recession), suggesting they are following similar investment strategies. This roughly
tracks the S&P 500 over the same time period.
Note that Alcor has decided to keep more assets in cash lately; I don't know why.

Expenditures
Snapshot
I skimmed the ﬁnancial statements of both organizations for the past couple years, and this
is what I think I see:
Organization 2019
expenses
Liquid assets as of
12/31/2019
# of patients as of
12/31/2020
Alcor
$4.4M
$27.9M
181
Cryonics
Institute
$350K
$7.9M
198
In brief: The two have similar numbers of patients, Alcor has signiﬁcantly more assets than
CI, but CI spends a signiﬁcantly smaller percentage of its assets each year than Alcor (4.4%
vs 15.8% in 2019).
Alcor
I think the most obvious question is: Why are Alcor's expenses so high?? Not only are they
high, but they've been increasing over the past few years - they hovered between $1.5M and
$2M from 2007 to 2017, then shot up to $3M in 2018 and $4.4M in 2019. 
In both cases (2017-18 and 2018-19) the bulk of the increase was due to 'professional fees',
which increased by more than a million dollars each year - a 550% year-over-year increase
from 2017-18 and an additional 100% increase from 2018-19. 

I didn't see any explanation for this, either in the ﬁnancial reports or in any of Alcor's updates
since late 2017 - admittedly I didn't look that hard, but the increase is so large that you'd
hope it'd be mentioned prominently. I'd hazard a guess that it points to either a major shift in
strategy, or some really thorny legal cases (Mati pointed me to this 2019 lawsuit), but that's
just speculation. I did check whether there'd been a large spike in the number of
preservations done in those years, but there wasn't anything outside of the normal range.
Another concern I have is that the 2017 numbers as reported at the end of 2017 are
substantively diﬀerent from the 2017 numbers as reported (and used for comparison) at the
end of 2018. Not diﬀerent enough to aﬀect the trends, but deﬁnitely diﬀerent, and I don't
know why. Note that, as mentioned above, I did not reach out to Alcor directly to ask.
Cryonics Institute
(Note: 2017 is omitted because as far as I can tell they only have half-year data for that
year? Spending for that year does appear to fall somewhere within the expected range - I'm
just not sure exactly where.)
As you can see, CI's expenses have remained remarkably stable over the past decade,
basically always falling between $300K and $400K per year - and note that this is before
adjusting for inﬂation.
Other factors
Professionalism
CI does a way worse job than Alcor of projecting professionalism. For example, compare
Alcor's annual ﬁnancial report's vs CI's. Alcor has long, standardized, well-formatted
documents full of legalese, while CI has PDFs of spreadsheets that look diﬀerent from year to
year and don't even have font consistency within individual documents. Its website is diﬃcult

to navigate and riddled with spelling errors. As we saw above, it doesn't even pretend to be
planning for long-term stability.
Also, CI members regularly receive phishing emails like this one:
On the other hand, there's the argument that CI is what it is, and it isn't trying to deceive you
with a veneer of professionalism. It's not like Alcor's consistent font usage changes the fact
that it's underprepared for global disasters or that many of its patients incur lots of ischemic
time.
Membership
If we take their reported membership numbers at face value, CI has more members than
Alcor. However, I'm told that CI has stopped reporting how many of its members are actually
signed up for cryopreservation (you can be a CI Member without signing up, whereas you're
only a full Alcor Member if you sign up; otherwise you're only an Associate Member), so just
comparing the numbers to one another doesn't tell you much.[1] In any case, they're in the
same general ballpark, with around 1000 people signed up for cryonics through each
organization.
Summary
Why choose CI?
Easier signup
Signing up with CI is easier because they don't need to be the owner of your life insurance
policy (just the beneﬁciary), which broadens your options considerably. You can even use a
group insurance policy obtained through your employer.
More ﬁnancially conservative
You might decide to bet on CI long-term based on the fact that its spending is much lower
and much more consistent than Alcor's.
It can be cheaper
If you're really strapped for cash and want to get signed up right now, CI is more likely to be
aﬀordable. See "When is CI cheaper?" above. 

Why choose Alcor?
Better preservation
It seems like by far the most important thing is being near a perfusion team when you die, if
at all possible. Alcor makes that easier with its relocation assistance and its relationship with
a hospice. It also removes the cognitive burden of standby arrangements by making
centralized standby mandatory for all members. 
Perfusion is a murkier area, but I feel that I've seen more reason to be conﬁdent in Alcor's
perfusion technology than CI's.
Future planning
While it's still far from as good as it needs to be to last 1000 years, Alcor at least
outperforms CI on having done basic future planning, like choosing a low-risk location for its
facilities and raising its prices to keep pace with inﬂation.
Solid reputation
While the reputation itself is screened oﬀ by the other considerations presented in this post,
it appears to me that - due to its claims to professionalism - Alcor is held to higher standards
than CI by people in the cryonics community. This kind of scrutiny may or may not lead to
actual better performance, but it at least incentivizes it. 
Bottom line
If you're in the Americas, I recommend Alcor. If you're in Eurasia, I probably still recommend
Alcor, but I'd also be interested in someone looking further into Tomorrow Biostasis.
Commenting guidelines
I approached this question in good faith and had no pre-existing ties to either Alcor or CI. No
cryonics organization ﬁlls me with conﬁdence, but given that these are the options I have to
choose among, I've chosen Alcor. If your calculus comes out diﬀerent, feel free to express
why in the comments. I'd also be interested to hear if you think I've made any factual errors.
However, if I judge your comments to be unnecessarily partisan (in any direction), hostile, or
otherwise unproductive, I will delete them. 
*Besides Alcor and CI, there are at least four other US-based cryonics organizations: 
American Cryonics Society (ACS), Oregon Cryonics, Osiris, and Trans Time.
If you sign up for cryopreservation through American Cryonics Society, your storage
will ultimately be handled by CI. ACS's value-add is that they oﬀer additional options,
like diﬀerent preservation procedures and establishment of a research and reanimation
fund. You can read more about these on their website.
Oregon Cryonics has a decent reputation from what I can tell, but they only accept
members who live very near their facilities in Salem, so they're not worth looking into
for the vast majority of people.
Osiris is very new and not very well regarded.
Trans Time appears to have its own cryo storage facility with a nonzero number of
patients in cryostasis, but their website is so intensely awful that I can't ﬁgure out what
they do or how one might go about signing up with them.

 
Whole-body
price
Neuro
price
Founded Standby
Patients Members*
Alcor
$200,000
$80,000 1974
Mandatory 181
1317
ACS
$155,000
N/A
1969
Optional
19
?
CI
$28,000
N/A
1976
Optional
200
1725
KrioRus $36,000
$18,000 2005
Optional
51
200
Oregon
Cryo
N/A
$48,000 2005
Mandatory 8
?
Osiris
$28,500
N/A
2016
?
?
?
Trans
Time
$150,000
?
1972
?
3
?
*Remember that members are not necessarily signed up for cryonics.
There are also some additional international cryonics organizations:
Shandong Yinfeng Life Science Research Institute (or Yinfeng for short), in China, has
been operating since 2015.
Cryonics Germany is a small operation that provides neuro storage only.
Southern Cryonics is slated to open soon and will be the ﬁrst cryonics provider in the
southern hemisphere.
1. ^
The last time CI shared the fraction of their members that were signed up for cryonics
was in 2014, and it was 578/1010 = ~57%. If we assume the same ratio today, we ﬁnd
that 983 people are signed up for cryonics with CI. As of October 2020, 285 CI
members were signed up with Suspended Animation; 285/983 = ~29%. 
2. ^
This section would beneﬁt immensely from someone more ﬁnancially savvy looking
into it for even just an hour. For example, I'd love for someone to look into this claim
from the 2012 thread:
Unlike CI, Alcor has created robust practices and mechanisms for long-term
maintenance and growth of the Patient Care Trust Fund and the Endowment Fund.
Go take a look at CI's ﬁnancial reports. See how little money is available for the
indeﬁnite care and eventual revival of each patient. Also look at the returns on
investment of those funds.
3. ^
See "What about inﬂation?"
4. ^
See "But what if I don't have anything?"

#4: Introduction to life insurance for
cryonics
This is post 4 of 10 in my cryonics signup sequence , and the ﬁrst of ﬁve posts on life
insurance. I know that sounds like a lot. It's gonna be okay. 
Introduction
Why life insurance?
There are multiple ways to fund your cryopreservation, but most people use life
insurance "because it requires no sizeable up front assets." So I'll be focusing on life
insurance, which is a likely-unfamiliar bureaucratic labyrinth. Be aware that most
people who buy permanent life insurance are using it as an investment vehicle, and as
such, a lot of the advice out there just doesn't apply to you.
For information about alternative payment options for Alcor and CI - particularly
relevant if you have enough cash to fund your cryopreservation in full right now - see
Appendix B. If you are using KrioRus you can skip the next ﬁve posts, since KrioRus
has its own payment structure.
What is life insurance?
In brief, when you take out a life insurance policy, you pay an insurance company a
monthly fee, in exchange for them paying out a lump sum to someone when you die.
In the case of cryonics, this sum is paid to your cryonics provider, in order to cover
your cryopreservation.
The moment you make your ﬁrst payment, your beneﬁciary is entitled to the full death
beneﬁt amount, even if you die the next day.
Process overview
The process of obtaining life insurance can be daunting, so I want to lay it out in
excruciating detail, roughly divided into three subsections:
1. Decision process (~4 to 20 hours)
1. Read my posts on life insurance to get a basic understanding of the
landscape
2. Contact a life insurance agent who's familiar with cryonics
3. Provide the agent with your personal health information
4. Talk with the agent to understand your options based on your
insurability, ﬁnancial situation, and personal preferences
5. Look over quotes/illustrations from your agent
6. Make a ﬁnal decision on your policy type, carrier, and death beneﬁt
amount

2. Underwriting process (~6 to 10 weeks)
1. Tell your agent you'd like to begin the underwriting process
2. Submit an application by meeting with your agent
3. Complete a phone interview about your health with someone from
ExamOne
4. Submit to a brief medical exam if your health is in question
5. Wait
3. Final steps (~1 hour)
1. Look over the ﬁnal policy with your agent
2. Sign your policy 
3. Send your policy to Alcor/CI
In this post, I'll cover the basics - including how much life insurance you'll need, what
information you'll want on hand, and what to do if you're not a US citizen. I have four
other posts that look more deeply into types of life insurance, cryonics-friendly
insurance carriers, cryonics-friendly life insurance agents, and the underwriting
process, respectively. 
Terms & deﬁnitions
There's a lot of jargon in the ﬁeld of life insurance that I'll be using pretty
indiscriminately in the coming posts. So here's a glossary (partially via Policygenius,
mostly via me):
Beneﬁciary
The person(s) who are selected by the policyholder to
receive the death beneﬁt. In our case, this is the cryonics
provider.
Carrier
The company through which you obtain life insurance.
Cash value
A tax-deferred savings account that is included in some
permanent life insurance policies.
Contingent
beneﬁciary
The person(s) who are selected by the policyholder to
receive the death beneﬁt in case the original beneﬁciary is
deceased, refuses the death beneﬁt, or cannot be located.
Coverage
amount
The amount paid to beneﬁciaries when a policyholder
dies. This is the same as death beneﬁt.
Death
beneﬁt
The amount paid to beneﬁciaries when a policyholder dies.
Illustration /
Policy
illustration
A non-binding document detailing a potential insurance
policy, including premiums, term, and (if applicable)
projected performance. Similar to a quote.
Insurance
agent
A middleman between you and insurance companies;
helps you navigate bureaucracy. Employed by a speciﬁc
insurance company.
Insurance
broker
A middleman between you and insurance companies;
helps you navigate bureaucracy. Employed by an
independent/third-party ﬁrm.
Overfunding Taking out more coverage than the minimum needed.
Owner
The person whose name is on the insurance policy and
who is able to access information about it and control it.

Premium
The regular payments made toward the insurance policy.
These are typically monthly.
Rider
Something you add to your insurance policy. Probably
don't worry about this; I didn't.
Surrender
Cancelling your policy, e.g. if you can no longer aﬀord the
premiums. For our purposes, you want to avoid this.
Term
The amount of time for which your policy is in force.
Underwriting The approval process for life insurance.
Coverage amount
How much coverage you need depends on the cost of the preservation you decided
on. It also depends on how much inﬂation you expect there to be between now and
your legal death.
Minimum coverage
Currently, Alcor's minimum required funding for neuropreservation is $80,000, while
the minimum funding for full-body preservation is $200,000. Alcor recommends
overfunding your life insurance policy by at least $25,000, so that's $105,000 for
neuro and $225,000 for full-body. This will be your starting coverage amount when
seeking life insurance. This is conveniently enough overfunding that your standby fees
are automatically waived!
CI charges $28,000, so life insurance costs will be proportionally lower. Remember
that you may also want to pay $30,000 to CI for stabilization and transportation, and
$30,000 to Suspended Animation for standby, which brings you to a total coverage
amount of about $90,000.
Accounting for inﬂation
As mentioned in my last post, Alcor's costs have historically risen in tandem with
inﬂation. CI's have remained the same since 1976, but I don't expect that to be
sustainable forever. So ideally you should plan to have available not the minimum
funding amount, but instead, that amount compounded by the general rate of
inﬂation.
Let's assume that costs double roughly every 20 years. If you're in your 60s, like my
mom, there's ~one doubling time before the end of your natural lifespan, so you
should plan on neuropreservation being ~$160,000 and whole-body being ~$400,000.
If you're in your 20s, like me, there are three doubling times, making
neuropreservation ~$650,000 and whole-body ~$1 million. 
There are three broad ways to handle the inevitable cost increases that come with
inﬂation:
1. Overfunding your life insurance policy - i.e. taking out a policy with a larger
death beneﬁt
2. Purchasing additional life insurance in the future

3. Doing nothing - Alcor can handle cost increases on their end by just charging
you extra fees (CI hasn't yet needed to implement a system for this)
I opted for #1, taking out more life insurance from the outset. I also chose a policy
with a death beneﬁt that increases over time and that's somewhat adjustable
depending on how much money I pay into the policy. I'm hoping this will give me
enough ﬂexibility that I won't have to buy additional life insurance or pay extra fees to
Alcor.
I recommend against #2, since life insurance gets more expensive the older you are,
and waiting to purchase it is always a gamble since you may suddenly become less
healthy. I don't really know how the fees are structured in #3, but my guess is that
this method is probably more expensive than just taking out additional insurance from
the outset would have been.
Additional overfunding
Potentially switching from neuro to whole-body
If you - like me - are signing up for neuropreservation, but think you might want to
switch to whole-body in the future, then you should have a high enough funding level
to cover whole-body from the outset. The reason for this is that life insurance gets
more expensive the older you are, so it's risky to plan on taking out extra life
insurance in the future, if and when you decide to switch to whole-body.
Other potential cost increases
I was repeatedly warned by insurance agents of 'potential cost increases' in cryonics,
which they told me would be due to advancement in cryonics technology and medical-
speciﬁc inﬂation rates. But when I looked into this, I only found cost increases in line
with global inﬂation. It's not impossible that some radical new technology will
drastically change the cost landscape before it comes time to cryopreserve you, but
one can't make a strong argument that that will happen just based on historical data.
Here's how I see it:
Factors driving costs down: Economies of scale; some potential technological
advances (e.g. ones that make the process quicker and easier)
Factors driving costs up: Inﬂation; some potential technological advances
(e.g. extra step in preservation, or new more expensive cryoprotectant)
My recommendation is to ignore anything your agent (or anyone, unless they have
insider knowledge) says about process-based cost increases, and plan only for global
inﬂation.
Life insurance as ﬁnancial investment
If you opt for a policy that involves cash growth at all, you should think of any
overfunding beyond the required amount as a ﬁnancial investment. Basically every
single article I've read about life insurance as an investment vehicle has screamed
THIS IS A BAD INVESTMENT!! So I strongly caution you against being attracted to
overfunding your policy just for the extra cash value - you'd do better to just put that
extra money into index funds.

Before you get started
Personal & medical history
You'll want to have your medical history handy before you begin the process, for
convenience's sake, since your insurance premiums are calculated based on actuarial
projections of your likelihood of dying. Factors that go into that are your age, gender,
health history, location, and whether you engage in hazardous activities. Hazardous
activities include extreme sports (such as BASE jumping), dangerous occupations
(such as logging), and drug use (especially smoking). Insurance companies seem to
care a lot about what medications you're on and whether you speciﬁcally use tobacco.
If your risk factors are too high, some insurance carriers might deny you entirely.
Others will just charge you high premiums.
Insurance companies also want to know your income, but this will not aﬀect your
premiums.
Visa status (USA)
It's very diﬃcult to be approved by a US insurer if you're not a US citizen, unless you
can show that you're on a path to citizenship or permanent residency - and apparently
it's only gotten harder with COVID and the Trump administration. The reason these
laws exist is to prevent non-citizens from using insurance as a means of money
laundering, which does make sense but is kind of a bummer for our purposes.
There do exist life insurance carriers that will approve non-citizens, but they aren't the
same as the cryonics-friendly carriers. Luckily, your cryopreservation can be funded
by life insurance underwritten in another country! I'll cover this in a bit more detail in
the next post.
If you have a Green Card or an H-1B or L-1 visa, you're ﬁne - you should be able to get
coverage because the government sees you as being on a path to citizenship or
permanent residency. It also helps to have assets in the US (not just cash but physical
assets such as real estate) or to have family here.

#4.1: Types of life insurance
This is post 5 of 10 in my cryonics signup guide , and the second of ﬁve posts on life
insurance.
In this post, I'll cover the diﬀerent types of life insurance policies you might want to use
to fund your cryopreservation. This is the most complicated part of this entire
sequence and it's taken me many, many hours of confusion to reach even the tenuous
understanding I'm presenting here. Please bear with me and let me know if you spot
any errors or have any questions.
Note that in addition to being labyrinthine, the life insurance landscape changes fairly
often, such that the options that were available to you when you signed up for cryonics
ten years ago might no longer be oﬀered. They're always adding new types of life
insurance and getting rid of old ones, and the name of a policy doesn't always tell you
the relevant information about it.
Getting oriented
Life insurance policy types vary along several major axes. Some cover you forever,
while others expire; some are more expensive than others; some are more reliable and
others are more ﬂexible.
Here is the basic information in table form. You may want to refer back to this if you get
confused while reading.
 
 Duration  Premiums 
Death
 beneﬁt 
Cash
 value 
 Interest
rates 
 Price 
 Term Life 
Fixed term
Fixed
Fixed
No
N/A
$
 Whole Life  Permanent
Fixed
Fixed
Yes
Guaranteed
 $$$$$ 
 Universal
Life 
Permanent
Adjustable
Adjustable
Yes
Determined
by the
carrier;
variable
 $$$$ 
Guaranteed
 Universal
Life 
Permanent
Fixed
Fixed
No
Guaranteed
$$
Indexed
Permanent
Adjustable
Adjustable
Yes
Indexed on
$$$

 Universal
Life 
S&P 500,
capped
For maximum hope of successful communication, I've approached this question from
two angles - ﬁrst I'll talk about the ways in which policies diﬀer from one another, then
I'll give a summary of each type of policy. 
Properties of an ideal cryonics life
insurance policy
Before we get into what types of life insurance actually exist, I think it's useful to think
about what a life insurance policy tailored speciﬁcally for cryonics would look like. Then
we can ﬁnd the real-world policy that corresponds most closely to the ideal.
Permanence
You want coverage until you die, because otherwise there's no point. This means that
you should steer away from term policies, unless you expect to be able to self-fund in
the future.
Flexibility
Your death beneﬁt needs to cover the full amount of your cryopreservation at the time
when you die. Since you can't know exactly when you will die or how much cryonics
will cost at that time, ideally you would get the amount of coverage currently needed
to cover your preservation, and your death beneﬁt would keep pace with inﬂation as
time went on. That is, essentially, it would pay out a certain amount of purchasing
power, rather than a certain dollar amount.
If you're signing up for neuropreservation, your policy would ideally have the ﬂexibility
to switch to whole-body built in. This means your death beneﬁt would be adjustable -
for example, you could just pay higher premiums if you wanted to increase the death
beneﬁt amount.
Returns
Ideally the money you pay in premiums would earn interest for you. And of course, all
else equal you want the price to be as low as possible.
TL;DR
An ideal policy for our purposes would:
Be cheap, permanent, and ﬂexible
Have a death beneﬁt that grows with inﬂation
Earn interest for you

Axes of variance
Fixed term vs permanent insurance
All of the insurance agents I've talked to have recommended permanent insurance for
cryonics, but I know at least two people who have chosen term insurance, so it's worth
looking at both.
Term insurance
As the name implies, term insurance covers you for a ﬁxed amount of time. You can get
term insurance for up to 30 years. Generally, once the term ends, your coverage ends.
Term insurance is the cheapest option by a factor of ~two, which is the primary reason
someone might choose it. However, term insurance is given to you basically on the
condition that it's very unlikely that you'll die within the term - which is how they can
aﬀord to sell it so cheap. According to one agent I talked to, only 3% of term policies
result in a death claim.
Permanent insurance
Again, the name is pretty self-explanatory - permanent insurance covers you until you
die, whenever that may be. Since there are several subtypes of permanent insurance,
there are fewer broad claims I can make here. But I can say that permanent insurance
is more expensive than term insurance, and that there are more options available.
Which one should I choose?
Permanent insurance is overall a far better choice for cryonics, because the death
beneﬁt will pay out no matter what age you are when you die. Gordon Worley gives a
good summary of term insurance:
[U]sing term life insurance is cheaper but riskier, since you might outlive the term
and be too old to purchase additional life insurance at a reasonable rate when you
need it, eﬀectively canceling your ability to pay for cryonics unless you have in the
intervening time managed to do ﬁnancially well enough to self-fund.
However, if you're signing up for cryonics but are really strapped for cash, you might
want to take out a term policy just in case you die soon, then switch to a permanent
policy once you're more ﬁnancially secure. If you're able to make the switch within ~5
years, or before the age of ~35, you should still be able to get permanent life
insurance at a reasonable rate.
Cash value
From Policygenius:
Whole life insurance and universal life insurance both have a cash-value
component. Each month, a certain portion of the premium you pay to keep the
policy active goes into a tax-deferred savings account, known as the cash value of
the policy. (The exact amount that goes into savings is determined by your
individual policy.) The policy's cash value grows over time.

Depending on your policy and how much cash value it's built up, you may be able
to use the cash value to pay your premiums, or take out a low-interest loan against
your policy. However, both of these options come with some risk: if you die before
you repay your loan, the amount you owe will be deducted from your death
beneﬁt. And if you use up all of your policy's cash value to pay your premiums,
your policy will lapse.
Some policies allow you to choose how your excess premiums are invested, while
others invest them in the S&P 500 or just guarantee you a certain rate of return.
When using life insurance to fund cryopreservation, you should just not touch the cash
value at all. But it's good to have it anyway because:
If you surrender the policy because you can't aﬀord it anymore, you can get the
accumulated cash value back from it (less surrender charges and taxes).
In some cases, the cash value is added to the original death beneﬁt amount, and
both pay out to your beneﬁciary when you die. This depends on your speciﬁc
policy rather than just on your policy type; for more detail on level vs increasing
death beneﬁts, see Investopedia's explanation.
Guaranteed vs non-guaranteed insurance
Guaranteed
What parts of the policy are guaranteed?
Premiums are locked in at time of buying and guaranteed to never change
(either forever or until a certain very old age like 120)
Death beneﬁt is guaranteed to pay out in full
Interest rates (if applicable) are ﬁxed at a rate set by the insurance company
Guaranteed insurance provides peace of mind, but it also lacks ﬂexibility, and interest
rates (when applicable) are relatively low.
Non-guaranteed
Why would you choose something with the name non-guaranteed? Basically, because
while you're losing certainty, you're gaining ﬂexibility. Also, exposing yourself to more
risk means leaving open the possibility of higher gains - the projected returns on non-
guaranteed policies are signiﬁcantly higher than those for guaranteed policies.
With non-guaranteed policies, premiums are dependent on market performance, so if
the market outperforms projections, you won't have to pay as much into the policy as
initially quoted. Conversely, if the market tanks hard for a long time, your premiums
can rise basically without bound. This is why you'll be cautioned that "Non-guaranteed
coverage has an inherent risk of becoming unaﬀordable, in which case you might ﬁnd
yourself unable to secure any life insurance."
Types of insurance
Term insurance

Term insurance is non-permanent; it lasts for 10, 20, or 30 years and is very unlikely to
cover you until death.
Premiums
Term insurance is the cheapest option by a factor of two or more, but only if you're
statistically highly unlikely to die within the term. If you're closer to death, term
premiums become exorbitant. Term insurance is also brittle - your policy will lapse if
you miss a single payment.
Death beneﬁt
Term insurance pays out a ﬁxed death beneﬁt. There is no cash accumulation or death
beneﬁt growth.
Whole life insurance
Whole life is a guaranteed, permanent policy with cash value accumulation. It is
expensive.
Premiums
Whole life is the most expensive type of policy. Whole life premiums can be up to 5x as
expensive as term premiums and 2x as expensive as IUL premiums. However, they are
also guaranteed to never change for as long as you live.
Cash value
Whole life has a cash value component. Excess premiums are invested at the insurance
company's discretion, usually with returns of about 2-6% per year.
Death beneﬁt
Your death beneﬁt is guaranteed to pay out in full. It increases somewhat over time; for
me, the dollar amount would ~double between now and the time I'm 90.
Payment options (limited vs lifetime)
There are two payment options for whole life insurance: limited payment and lifetime
payment. The diﬀerences between the two are quite straightforward.
Lifetime payment is cheaper per month, but you have to pay every month for
the rest of your life.
Limited payment is more expensive per month, but after a ﬁxed time, you will
have entirely paid oﬀ your policy and you'll get to have it forever without paying
anymore.
Assuming you're young and unlikely to die soon, choosing a 20-year limited payment
('20 pay') will result in a lower cumulative out-of-pocket cost before inﬂation. (For me
it's lower even taking into account 2% inﬂation per year, but I'm quite young so YMMV).
Conversely, if you, like my mom, are signing up when there are only about 20 years left
in your expected lifespan, choosing 20 pay would be stupid because it would just be
more expensive with no upsides.
TL;DR

Expensive but guaranteed
Static premiums
Death beneﬁt may grow a bit
Cash value invested with 2-6% returns
Option to pay oﬀ the policy in full in 10 or 20 years
Indexed universal life insurance (IUL)
IUL is a non-guaranteed, permanent policy with cash value accumulation. It is tied to
the performance of the S&P 500.
Premiums
IUL is a relatively cheap type of permanent policy. Premiums are calculated based on
the current crediting rate (~6% at time of writing), but you have to rerun policy
illustrations every 5 to 10 years to check if the policy is underperforming. If interest
rates decline, your premiums may rise, and in the worst case, your death beneﬁt may
drop below adequate coverage. On the other hand, if interest rates rise, your premiums
may drop and you could potentially stop having to pay at all.
IUL premiums are also ﬂexible. You can pay more into the policy if you want to increase
the death beneﬁt, or you can miss months and let the policy pay for itself out of the
accumulated cash value.
Cash value
IUL has a cash value component. Premiums are invested in the S&P 500, and the
interest you earn goes toward reducing your premiums, with the excess amount (after
funding the cash value and the insurance company's cut) going to increase the growth
of the cash value.
Performance is capped - meaning that there's a limit on how high your returns can be,
but you're also protected from risk. The connection to S&P 500 is tax-free and credit-
protected.
Death beneﬁt
The death beneﬁt in IUL policies is ﬂexible - you can adjust it up or down (within limits)
by paying higher or lower premiums. It also grows over time - the accumulated cash
value, if left untouched, is added to the death beneﬁt, such that the payout upon your
death is [the initial death beneﬁt] + [the accumulated cash value].
In my case, with reasonable interest rate assumptions, I was able to get the death
beneﬁt to keep pace with inﬂation (in expectation) by paying a bit extra per month.
TL;DR
Relatively cheap and risky
Tied to S&P 500
Pricing based on current interest-rate assumptions
Flexible premiums
Flexible and growing death beneﬁt

Universal life insurance (UL)
UL is just like IUL except worse, because it's more expensive and your cash value
disappears when you die rather than being paid out to your beneﬁciary. Another
diﬀerence is that your premiums are invested at the insurance company's discretion
rather than just being invested in the S&P 500.
This section is shorter than the other ones because no agent ever recommended that I
consider UL, so I didn't put as much time into understanding it. I did talk to someone
who used a UL policy to fund his cryopreservation, but he got that policy years ago and
the landscape has changed since then; the carrier in question doesn't even oﬀer UL
anymore.
Guaranteed universal life insurance (GUL)
GUL is a guaranteed, permanent policy with no cash accumulation. You can think of it
either as a cheaper whole life policy without cash accumulation, or as a term policy
that lasts until a certain age (or until death) rather than for a certain amount of time.
Premiums
GUL is the cheapest type of permanent insurance. Your premiums are ﬁxed at the time
of buying and guaranteed not to change until a certain age (e.g. 90 or 121), at which
point you'll likely already be dead.
Death beneﬁt
You have coverage as long as you pay your premiums. Since there's no cash value,
there's nothing to support the death beneﬁt if you stop paying your premiums, so the
policy is brittle. Your death beneﬁt is guaranteed not to decrease, but it will also never
increase.
TL;DR
Cheap and secure
No cash value or death beneﬁt growth
Basically a term policy that lasts until age 90 or later
Choosing a policy
The decision about what kind of life insurance to buy ultimately comes down to
whether you care most about reliability, ﬂexibility, or budget. It also depends on your
personal insurability. 
Why I chose IUL
When I started the process, I thought I cared most about reliability, and I was leaning
towards whole life. But as I gradually considered more angles, and especially when I
thought about the expected amount of inﬂation between now and the end of my

natural lifespan, ﬂexibility and higher expected cash accumulation began to sound a lot
more valuable to me.
A lot of people and a lot of websites played up the risks of IUL to me. But I looked at
the illustrations, and I looked at historical interest rates, and I think the risks were
usually overstated. Yes, the risks are there, but I think they're suﬃciently unlikely that
the policy is overall a good bet. In addition, though I don't really understand The
Economy, it seems to me that if the market tanks hard enough that my IUL policy
lapses, cryonics providers are going to be in pretty big trouble anyway.
My recommendations
Here are my general recommendations, with the disclaimer that I am a layperson just
trying to ﬁgure things out from Google and a couple hours of talking to insurance
agents. Also maybe people without licenses aren't allowed to give advice on this kind
of thing, so, um, this is not advice.
If you're price-sensitive and expect to remain so:
Go for a permanent insurance option with low premiums (either GUL or IUL), and
get it now, before age and poor health make your premiums rise.
If you're currently price-sensitive but will be able to save a few hundred
thousand dollars in the next decade:
Get term insurance now so that you can pay the lowest premiums but still be
covered just in case you die in the next 20 (or 30) years. At the end of the term,
you'll have enough money to cover your preservation in full, at which point you
should self-fund with a trust.
(See this comment for my reservations about this option.)
If you just want to get the best thing:
If it's not too expensive given your risk proﬁle, I recommend IUL, because I think
the ﬂexibility makes it a good ﬁt for cryonics.
If you're old:
If you're around retirement age, your premiums are going to be very high.
Hopefully you've accumulated enough assets by that age to self-fund. But if you
can't, the best life insurance option is probably GUL, because the premiums will
be the most aﬀordable, and you don't need as much built-in ﬂexibility if you're
closer to the end of your lifespan.
Obviously I haven't covered every possible scenario, but I hope that you now have
enough context to be able to make an informed decision about what's best for you. 
As always, feel free to ask me questions about any of this. I can't promise to be able to
answer all of them due to my tenuous grasp on economics as a whole, but I do think
that even with that deﬁcit, I'm more equipped to answer questions about the life-
insurance-for-cryonics landscape than almost anyone.

#4.2: Cryonics-friendly life insurance
carriers
This is post 6 of 10 in my cryonics signup guide , and the third of ﬁve posts on life
insurance.
It's more diﬃcult to obtain life insurance for cryonics than to obtain life insurance in
general, because there's a very limited number of (well-rated) insurance companies in
the US that are okay with approving insurance 'for a cryonics objective.' One reason
for this is that in the case of cryonics, your life insurance policy is owned by a third
party, which makes things complicated and risky for the insurance company.
According to my insurance broker, there are currently ~four insurance companies in
the US that will underwrite for cryonics. These companies - in order of how likely you
are to want to use them - are:
Kansas City Life
Nationwide
New York Life
Northwestern Mutual
Most people I know have used Kansas City Life (hereafter KCL), but there are
situations in which Nationwide might be the right choice. Nonetheless, let's take a
brief look at each of the options.
Kansas City Life (KCL)
Basically, I think everyone should go with KCL unless they have a speciﬁc reason not
to. (If you are young and healthy, you probably have no reason not to.) Here's why:
Easy process - While the other carriers require additional legal work before
approving a policy for cryonics, KCL will just approve you.
Multiple options - KCL oﬀers term, whole life, UL, and IUL policies, so odds are
good that they oﬀer the thing that you want. (If you're dead set on GUL, you'll
need to look elsewhere.)
Joint ownership - KCL is the only one of these companies that allows for joint
ownership of your insurance policy. This is great if you're an Alcor patient,
because you have to make Alcor an owner, but if Alcor is the sole owner, it's
really inconvenient for you because the company can't tell you anything about
the policy; all information has to go through Alcor. (It's irrelevant for CI patients).
Cryonics friendliness - While all of these companies are willing to underwrite
for cryonics, I'm pretty sure KCL has done it more than any of the rest. Cryonics
isn't weird or extra complicated for them to deal with.
Financial stability - According to Rudi Hoﬀman, KCL is debt-free, which is
unusual for an insurance company. This makes it even more unlikely than
average that the company will go under and your death beneﬁt will fail to pay
out.

I recognize that I sound like a freaking advertisement, but taking into account all the
factors it really does seem like KCL is the best option for most people when signing up
for cryonics. The crux for me is the lack of added complexity - something that will
become clearer when we look at other carriers below.
Nationwide
Depending on your age and other factors, Nationwide can be a more cost-eﬀective
option than KCL. My understanding is that, while Nationwide's premiums are generally
cheaper, they require additional steps for cryonics clients that add both cost and
complexity.
Oﬀerings
Nationwide oﬀers all the types of insurance relevant to us: UL, GUL, IUL, whole life,
and term. 
Additional complexity
If you choose Nationwide for a cryonics objective, you must establish a trust before
you can apply for insurance. Establishing a trust which holds your life insurance policy
for Alcor is a fairly common thing for Alcor members to do, and you can get help with
it from Alcor (they have a whole Trust Department). Alcor must review and accept
your trust before you can proceed. (I don't know how this works for CI, sorry.)
In addition (for Alcor members only), you're required to own a personal, non-cryonics
life insurance policy before you can get approved for the cryonics policy. This is
because insurance companies are wary of life insurance policies owned by a third
party, due to the potential for lawsuits. So you'll own two separate life insurance
policies, which somehow releases Nationwide from legal liability.
I'd ballpark the cost of this additional legal work at about $1000, but I haven't actually
done it so I don't know. If you have experience with taking out a cryonics policy from
Nationwide, let me know.
Stricter approval criteria
Nationwide has stricter guidelines than KCL for approvals - they need to see that
you're employed and have suﬃcient income to pay your premiums. 
If Nationwide is cheaper for you, but you're concerned about not being approved and
really want cryonics coverage right now (e.g. if you're relatively old), you can take out
a policy with KCL for the time being, then reapply through Nationwide. If you're
approved, you can surrender your KCL contract and replace it with the new, lower-cost
one from Nationwide.
Bottom line
Nationwide requires a substantial amount of additional legal work, but it is
signiﬁcantly more cost-eﬀective for some people. I recommend talking to David
Donato to ﬁnd out whether Nationwide is a better ﬁt for you than KCL.
The other ones

These two companies are willing to underwrite life insurance policies for cryonics, but I
haven't seen a good reason to go with either of them over KCL or Nationwide. Both are
subject to at least some of the same additional work as Nationwide, and neither allows
you to own your policy jointly with Alcor.
Northwestern Mutual
Northwestern's core competency is in whole life products, though they also oﬀer UL
and term insurance. Northwestern's premiums are more expensive than KCL's, and
like with Nationwide, you'll need to take out two separate life insurance policies.
Northwestern may or may not approve your cryonics policy without additional legal
work.
New York Life (NYL)
Like Nationwide, NYL requires you to set up a trust and take out a personal life
insurance policy before you can get approved for a cryonics policy. NYL oﬀers term,
whole life, and UL, and also something called Custom Universal Life Guarantee, which
sounds a lot like GUL from the description.
Non-USA insurance options
If you live outside of the United States - or if you live in the States but aren't a citizen
(and don't have a green card or an H-1B or L-1 visa) - don't worry! You can fund your
Alcor or CI preservation with an insurance policy from your home country. For Alcor,
you need to meet the following requirements:
The insurance provider must be rated A- or better by A.M. Best.
Alcor must be named as the beneﬁciary of the policy. 
(Alcor does not need to be the owner, since insurance companies in
countries outside the United States often are not willing to name a US
organization as the policy owner.)
There should either be no collateral assignees, or Alcor must be named as the
assignee.
The policy is placed in absolute trust.
A minimum of one Alcor representative is named as a Trustee.
The Death Beneﬁt (or Sum Assured) is permanently maintained equal to or in
excess of the Cryopreservation Minimum, in equivalent United States Dollars.
Alcor is to be notiﬁed if policy lapses.
Premium is paid current.
Alcor requires a copy of the policy, Policy Schedule, stamped Trust Request Form
(must be Absolute Trust), and stamped Deed (naming Alcor as an additional
Trustee).
CI stipulates the following:
CI must be named as the beneﬁciary of the policy.
The death beneﬁt amount must satisfy your minimum cryopreservation amount.
CI needs proof — updated at least annually — that CI is the beneﬁciary and that
the amount is suﬃcient.
If the policy is written in a language other than English, CI requires that the
entire insurance policy be translated into English, and they need a copy of both
the original policy and the certiﬁed English translation.

So getting a cryonics life insurance policy elsewhere is not very diﬀerent from doing it
in the US, except that you won't have this detailed guide to help you. It's my
impression that everywhere has the same basic types of insurance (e.g. term vs
permanent), though they may go by diﬀerent names; I might be wrong about this. 
And of course there will be as many diﬀerent regulatory environments as there are
countries, which can introduce some roadblocks. For example, from CI's website: 
In the United Kingdom there is a law that prevents a non-proﬁt corporation, such
as the Cryonics Institute, from being listed as a direct beneﬁciary on a British
person's life insurance policy.
But people all over the world (including the UK) are signed up with Alcor and CI, so it's
really just a matter of overcoming those roadblocks; they're rarely dealbreakers. As I
mentioned in the ﬁrst post in this sequence, if you're doing anything cryonics-related
outside of the US, try to get in contact with cryonicists in your country; they're eager
to help and they deﬁnitely know more than I do about what your options are.

#4.3: Cryonics-friendly insurance
agents
This is post 7 of 10 in my cryonics signup guide , and the fourth of ﬁve posts on life
insurance.
What is an insurance agent?
An insurance agent is someone who acts as an intermediary between insurance
buyers and insurance companies. They help you with paperwork that would otherwise
be a Kafkaesque nightmare, and they have the expertise to help you understand your
options no matter what your situation.
Technically, not all of the people on this list are 'insurance agents' - some are
'insurance brokers' instead - but I'm just going to use the term 'agent' throughout
because it would be clunky and confusing to write 'agent/broker' every time (Alcor and
CI make the same elision). 
Why do they need to know about cryonics?
I strongly recommend working with one of the people listed here if at all possible,
because a randomly chosen life insurance agent will not be familiar with the speciﬁc
companies and options most appropriate for cryonics patients. (I discussed some of
the complexities of obtaining life insurance for cryonics in the previous post if you're
curious.) In fact, most insurance agents - like most people in the world - will not be
familiar with cryonics at all.
Costs
There is no upfront cost to working with the US-based insurance agents
recommended here. Instead, they are paid a commission by the insurance company
once you've bought a policy - which gives them incentive to upsell you, so be aware
of that. (Note that a large majority of insurance agents in the US have this same
payment structure; I don't know about other countries.)
Alcor-recommended insurance agents
(USA)
Alcor's website recommends a few insurance agents who are used to helping Alcor
clients. I contacted all three of their recommended agents in the US, for value of
information. Below are my impressions of each of them.
Since you can back out of the life insurance process at any time before applying
without having to pay anything, shopping around is low-risk. I encourage you to take
the time to ﬁnd someone you like working with - I found that it really makes a big

diﬀerence. You could also help others out by calling up some of the guys I didn't talk
to and writing your own review.
Rudi Hoﬀman
Background
Rudi is the agent nearly everyone I know has used. He's very aware of the rationalist
community - he told me he's a long-time lurker on LessWrong and that we're the best
source of 'marketing' that cryonics has, and he mentioned he's helped lots of
rationalists sign up and thinks of them as friends. He himself has been an Alcor
member since 1994, which means he has skin in the game.
Specialty
Rudi will try to sell you an indexed universal life policy from Kansas City Life (his
employer). He thinks of life insurance as an investment (evidence: he calls the policies
"life insurance investments", and he himself has over a million dollars in such
investments), and so will try to sell you more than you need to cover your
cryopreservation.
Communication style
I ﬁnd Rudi very diﬃcult to communicate with. His communication style is very
energetic and rambling, such that I was never sure what topic we were covering, and
full meetings went by without me getting much information at all. Others have also
reported that it can be hard to get information out of Rudi. Not only is it hard to get a
word in edgewise, and not only does he switch topics at lightning speed, but he's also
always in sales mode, such that I don't expect him to ever say anything bad about IUL
or anything good about other types of insurance.
I found myself in the position of playing along with Rudi's overpowering personality
and pandering to his sense of humor. He was incredibly obsequious when talking to
me, which I found awkward, and which I think might have been because I'm a woman
(my male friends don't remember any obsequiousness). I've also been told that Rudi is
not a very good choice for transgender clients.
In short, I'm exhausted after every call with him. However, I am also much more
sensitive to this type of thing than most people, and I know tons of people who have
worked with him successfully. So, if you are a man and/or really good at interrupting
and steering conversations and/or you want an IUL policy from KCL and just don't care
that much about interaction style, far be it from me to warn you oﬀ of Rudi. Hopefully
some of the dozens of white male LWers who have worked with Rudi can chime in
here.
Further comments
Rudi will pretty transparently try to upsell you. While I eventually came to my own
conclusion that I should overfund my policy, I didn't appreciate that I told him I
wanted a $100K policy and he just decided to send me illustrations for $200K without
any explanation.
Rudi also pronounced my name (and one of my friends' names) wrong, and ploughed
ahead without ever checking. While it didn't particularly bother me on the object level,

it's a further bad sign regarding his communication style.
Perks: If you sign up for cryonics through Rudi, you'll get a free ticket and free
transportation to an annual conference for cryonicists under 30, and kitschy e-cards
on every major holiday.
TL;DR
Most rationalists go through Rudi.
He will try to sell you indexed universal life insurance from Kansas City Life, and
will try to upsell you.
Communication style is energetic, chaotic, obsequious, buddy-buddy, and salesy.
I don't recommend him if you're easily socially exhausted and/or not a cis man.
David Donato
Background
David has been working in this space for about 20 years and has lots of experience
helping people who are signing up for Alcor - including some of Alcor's board
members. I don't know many rationalists who have gone through him, but that might
just be because Rudi cornered the rationalist market early on, and word of mouth is
powerful.
Specialty
David will try to sell you what he thinks is the best ﬁt for your preferences and
situation. While he generally prefers KCL for cryonics clients, he doesn't work for any
single insurance company, which means he can shop around for the best deal for you.
Communication style
I really enjoyed talking with David, and I think my solid basic understanding of the life
insurance landscape is pretty much 100% thanks to him. He laid things out nicely
before diving in, which I really appreciated, and I found it easy to follow his
explanations. He appeared even-handed in his overview of the life insurance
landscape - he explained the pros and cons of each of the options in some depth, and
changed his recommendation for me from whole life to IUL upon noticing a change in
my preferences. 
I also really liked that he was careful not to overwhelm me with too much information
at once; I felt that he ﬁt just the right amount of information, at just the right level,
into our calls, and he checked in frequently to make sure I wasn't oversaturated. He's
a good listener, very helpful and accommodating, and he's open to communicating
however works best for you, whether that's phone, email, video call, or text. He
replies extremely promptly to emails. I just had a great experience working with him.
Further comments
I recommend video calling with David if you're getting quotes, because he lets you
watch him enter your information into the quoting software, and then you can play
around with funding at diﬀerent levels or projecting diﬀerent interest rates, and see
how diﬀerently things come out. Other agents just asked me for my info and then sent
me back 20-page illustrations, which is more eﬃcient but less informative.

David asked me at the beginning of our ﬁrst call how to pronounce my name, which I
appreciated, and I know a transgender cryonicist who had a good experience working
with him.
TL;DR
Super helpful and responsive, a great teacher.
Wants to sell you the product that's best for you.
Not tied to any speciﬁc insurance provider, so he can shop around for better
deals and potentially save you lots of money.
I had a great experience working with him and recommend him wholeheartedly.
Ryan Aug (Ben Archer State Farm)
Background
Ryan is the cryonics specialist on a small State Farm team in Texas. 
Specialty
Ryan by default provides you with quotes for both term and whole life policies. By
going through a State Farm agent, you automatically choose State Farm as your
insurance provider.
Communication style
All of my communication with Ryan occurred over email. His emails are short and to
the point, in a way that I appreciated. Since I was looking for someone to proactively
provide me with a lot of information, this wasn't the right ﬁt for me, but it seems great
if you already have a good sense of what kind of policy you want and are just looking
for someone to help you with the paperwork with no fuss. 
Further comments
Ryan Archer State Farm is only licensed in Texas and California. I was told that they'd
still be able to cover my family members in Wisconsin, but we'd need to list my
(California) address for them on the forms. My guess is that this isn't actually sketchy,
but I wasn't comfortable with it, so I decided not to go ahead with them.
The ﬁrm also oﬀers services in Spanish. If you can read LessWrong you're almost
certainly not a person who needs Spanish-language services, but maybe you have
family members who are.
Note that I got a lot less information about this option compared to the two others,
due to not having any calls with their agents.
TL;DR
Eﬀective, to-the-point communication.
Good if you already know what you want (and want to get it through State
Farm).
Only really an option if you're in Texas or California.
Oﬀers services in Spanish.

Agents I didn't work with
CI-recommended agents (USA)
In addition to recommending Ben Archer State Farm and Rudi Hoﬀman, CI
recommends Michael Flower, Jeﬀ Hansen, Bradley Holland, and Joseph Kowalsky in the
US. Because I had already chosen Alcor before beginning the life insurance process,
and because I'm not a maniac who wants to spend another 20 hours of my life
interfacing with insurance agents I already know I'm not going to work with, I didn't
look into any of their services. If you've worked with any of them, please let me know
your thoughts!
Non-USA insurance agents
Alcor recommends Ray Zadrey in Canada and Chris Morgan in the UK. CI recommends
Serge Vallée and Josee Mainville in Canada and Graham Holliday in the UK. I also know
a cryonicist who's gone through Carla Wojciechowski in Canada. Again, let me know if
you've used any of these people's services!

#4.4: The insurance underwriting
process
This is post 8 of 10 in my cryonics signup guide , and the last of ﬁve posts on life
insurance. Underwriting is not a complex or interesting topic, but I'm including this
brief writeup in the sequence for the sake of giving readers a complete picture of the
life insurance process from start to ﬁnish.
What is underwriting?
In the world of life insurance, 'underwriting' basically just means 'approval'. The life
insurance company needs to check your health to make sure that it's charging you the
right amount. 
To this end, they want to know your family health history, your own medical history,
and any hazards you're regularly exposed to (e.g. smoking tobacco, extreme sports,
workplace hazards). They may also want to know your income in order to determine
whether you're able to aﬀord the premiums.
Older and unhealthier people are at higher risk of dying soon, which means the
insurance company will probably need to pay out their death beneﬁt sooner. So
assuming (as a toy model) that the company wants to extract the same amount of
money from every client over the course of the client's lifetime, they will need to
charge more money per month to old and unhealthy people due to the compressed
timeline.
What to expect
If you're young and have no health problems, the underwriting process should be
quick and easy - just a phone call and a few weeks of waiting. If not, they'll look at
your medical records and possibly examine you in person, and there will be a couple
additional weeks of waiting tacked on.
The process
Submitting an application
You'll have a face-to-face meeting or video call with your insurance agent where they
send you some forms and watch you sign them. In order to apply, you'll need:
Your social security number
Your driver's license number
Your bank information
The name and SSN for a contingent beneﬁciary (the person or organization who
receives the death beneﬁt if your cryonics provider can't take it for any reason)

Phone interview
Once you've submitted your application, your insurance company (or a third party
that the insurance company contracts with, such as ExamOne) should call you within
two business days to conduct the phone interview. The call will take about 30 minutes.
They will ask you about:
Your past and current medical history
Names, addresses, and phone numbers of physicians and hospitals from
which you have received medical care within the last 10 years
Names and dosages of prescription medications you are currently taking
and for what purpose
Your family medical history
Your employment status, income, and net worth
Lifestyle factors such as tobacco use, driving record, foreign travel, and
recreational activities
Existing amounts of life insurance in force or applications pending with other
companies
Importantly, you should not volunteer any extra information beyond what is needed to
answer their speciﬁc questions honestly. For example, when they say, "Anything
else?", you should not say "Well, sometimes I feel really tired and I don't know why" or
"There's a mole on my hand that I'm kinda worried about" or "I get sad sometimes but
I've never been to a doctor to get tested for depression." If you haven't been
diagnosed with or treated for a thing, they don't need to know about it.
If you seem healthy to them, great, now all you have to do is wait. If they ﬁnd any
reason for concern, they will dig deeper, which brings us to:
Releasing your medical records
The underwriting agency may ask for your medical records, including all test results,
prescriptions, and diagnoses. In my case, they wanted to look at the last ﬁve years.
This is a pretty hands-oﬀ process on your part; all I had to do was sign a release form
with my doctor's oﬃce.
Medical exam
How does it work?
People over the age of ~40, and anyone whose health they decide to scrutinize, will
be subject to a pretty standard medical exam. You can either go into an oﬃce for this
exam or have an examiner come to you at home. They say you'll need a photo ID and
current health insurance cards, but my examiner didn't ask me for any health
insurance info. 
I had someone come to my home and conduct the exam outdoors for COVID safety.
The whole thing took about 45 minutes but it would probably take less long than that
on a less muddy and windy day.
What will they measure?

The examiner will measure your height and weight, take your pulse, measure your
blood pressure, and take samples of blood and urine. In some circumstances, there
may also be an EKG component. For your blood, they claim to only be looking at
cholesterol levels, blood sugar levels, and kidney and liver function.
In addition to the exam itself, they may also ask you some redundant questions, such
as what medications you take, your health history, and how much you exercise.
Information you should volunteer:
Any history of problems associated with providing a blood sample
Whether you're currently menstruating
Waiting
The vast majority of the underwriting process is just waiting. In the best case, where
you complete the phone interview promptly and don't need any further scrutiny, you'll
wait for about six weeks.
Final steps
After the carrier approves your policy, they'll send it to your life insurance agent, who
will walk you through all the details. If you're satisﬁed, all you need to do is sign the
policy and send it to your insurance provider.

#5: Making your cryonics
arrangements oﬃcial
This is post 9 of 10 in my cryonics signup sequence .
Once you've got your funding method set up, you're not quite done. You'll need to
enter into an oﬃcial cryopreservation agreement with your cryonics organization, and
there are quite a few additional forms you have to ﬁll out in order to make that
happen.
Required paperwork
Alcor
Membership application
Fill out the Alcor membership application available here. The application fee is $300;
the default is to pay by card, but you can contact Alcor if you want to use a diﬀerent
payment method.
Cryopreservation contracts
Once you've sent in your membership application, complete with funding method,
Alcor will physically mail you the cryopreservation contracts to read and sign. This
runs ~60 pages, but it should mostly be information you already know. 
You'll need two non-relative witnesses to sign the various documents, and in all states
except California, you'll need a notary to notarize your Last Will and Testament for
Human Remains.
The packet sent to you by Alcor includes the following [1]:
Cryopreservation Agreement
Attachment 1 to Cryopreservation Agreement
This document formalizes the choices you select on your membership
application (e.g. neuropreservation vs whole-body; what to do with any
excess funding)
Consent for Cryopreservation
Last Will and Testament for Human Remains and Authorization of Anatomical
Donation
Note that hyperlinks in this section link only to sample forms, not contracts that you
should actually try to sign.
Cryonics Institute
Membership application

There are two diﬀerent forms depending on whether you're applying for an annual
membership or a lifetime membership. The application fee for the former is $75; there
is no application fee for lifetime membership, but there's a one-time payment of
$1250.
Cryopreservation contracts
These are just all the basic legal documents you need; I think CI will send these to you
when appropriate. You will need the signature of a notary or the signatures of two
witnesses.
Main forms to ﬁll out:
Cryonic Suspension Agreement
Uniform Donor Form
Next of Kin Agreement
Consent/Release for Cryopreservation
Non-Suspension Rider
This document stipulates what should be done with your cryopreservation
funding in the case that CI is unable to carry out your cryopreservation
You may also want or need to ﬁll out the following, depending on your situation:
Local Help Rider
Stipulates that any funding provided beyond the minimum will be used by
CI to pay for the costs of the member's funeral director and shipping
Yearly Membership Rider
Agreement that Yearly Members must pay their dues in full in a timely
manner or their Cryonic Suspension Agreement will be void
Foreign Funds Rider
An attempt to ensure that funding for cryopreservation that is not
denominated in US Dollars does not fall below the allotted minimums
because of ﬂuctuations in exchange rates
Again, hyperlinks in this section link only to sample forms, not contracts that you
should actually try to sign.
Congratulations!
Once you've done all that paperwork and are oﬃcially signed up, your cryonics
provider will send you a membership packet containing a medical necklace and a
medical bracelet. You should wear these at all times in case you're ever in a fatal
accident; paramedics know to check for medical bracelets, and the tags inform them
of how to treat your body until a standby team arrives.
If you live outside of the US or regularly travel internationally, ask your cryonics
organization to send you tags that have a phone number with the American country
code preﬁx on it.
Ongoing maintenance

In order to actually get cryopreserved when it counts, you'll need to keep your
cryonics organization updated on any major changes, and keep abreast of updates on
their end as well. Here's a brief sample of what ongoing maintenance means:
Any time you move, let your cryonics organization know what your new address
is.
Alcor no longer grandfathers its members into the price at their time of signup,
so if preservation costs increase, you'll need to make sure you're still funding at
an adequate level.
If you've executed advance directives, review them regularly to make sure that
they still express your wishes accurately.
Let your cryonics organization know right away if you develop a potentially fatal
condition.
If you're funding with a non-guaranteed life insurance policy, check its
performance every ~5 years to make sure that it's on track to cover your
preservation costs.
[1] A previous version of this post also listed Emergency Standby Provisions +
Attachment 1 and Alcor's Buy-Back Agreement here. However, upon receiving my
packet I found that these were not included or mentioned anywhere, so I'm assuming
they're outdated.

#6: Optional additional steps
This is post 10 of 10 in my cryonics signup sequence .
Introduction
The preceding posts cover everything you need to be fully signed up for cryonics.
However, there are a lot of additional steps you may want to take to give yourself the
best chance at optimal conditions for cryopreservation.
Why do any of this?
As I've emphasized before, any delay in your cryopreservation is to be avoided as far
as possible - so any social or legal dispute could jeopardize your successful
preservation. In at least one case, an Alcor member was dead and buried for two full
months before Alcor even knew he had been ill. Needless to say, you don't want that
to happen to you - your organs will deﬁnitely not be in optimal condition if that
happens.
Essentially, you want to put yourself in a social and legal position such that your
cryopreservation won't be blocked by distraught or confused family members, medical
professionals, lawyers, or coroners. Pursuant to this, you should communicate your
intentions clearly to all stakeholders, codify your wishes in legal documents, and not
give anyone ﬁnancial incentive to interfere with your cryopreservation.
See more on these precautions from Alcor and CI. 
Do I have to do all of these things?
I've listed things in order of how important they seem to me - standby is ﬁrst because,
as I've discussed, not making standby arrangements is a great way to incur a ton of
ischemic damage. I also think everyone should execute healthcare advance directives
if possible, and everyone should at least make sure their family is aware of their
intentions.
My family and friends are very much onboard with cryonics, so I'm not worried about
anyone interfering with my cryopreservation. But it seemed so easy to have people
sign Relative's Aﬃdavits that I ﬁgured I would do it anyway. I'm not, however, making
a video explaining my intention to get cryopreserved - that seemed unnecessary. I'm
also young and healthy, and I don't have a relationship with an attorney, doctor, or
coroner, so I'm not talking to any of those people.
The ﬁnal two points - getting your family members signed up, and bringing assets into
the future - feel very much optional. 
Standby arrangements

As mentioned in previous posts, signing up for cryonics via CI does not automatically
sign you up for standby. If you want standby, you can get a contract with Suspended
Animation (see this page on CI's website) or make your own arrangements with a local
funeral director or volunteer standby group. Alcor members - especially those located
outside of North America - may also be interested in the latter due to the inherent
limitations of centralized standby.
If you're interested in making your own arrangements, I recommend seeking out
online discussion groups and/or connecting with other cryonicists in your area; I can't
personally oﬀer any advice because I've never done this.
Communicating your intentions to
your family
Most legal cases involving cryonics are brought by a family member of the patient,
who wishes to dispute the cryopreservation. In some cases this is because the
patient's children want to inherit the patient's money rather than having it go to Alcor,
but it may also be because the family was unaware of or confused about the patient's
wishes.
Because your family by default has so much say over what happens to your body and
estate after you die, it's important that you explain to them your wish to be
cryopreserved. Ideally do this as soon as possible, and not when you're on your
deathbed. 
Your family may or may not be receptive. If they're not, CI recommends that you
"Consider removing hostile or nonsupportive next of kin from control of your estate
and your remains legally in advance of your legal death so that hostile people can be
disempowered from making decisions you might otherwise disagree with."
Paperwork for relatives
If your family members are receptive, you should have them sign aﬃdavits promising
not to interfere with cryopreservation activities upon your death. Alcor's version of this
is a Relative's Aﬃdavit; CI's is the Next of Kin Agreement. Alcor says that a
Relative's Aﬃdavit "is a very eﬀective way to protect you."
Financial incentives
Consider who stands to gain ﬁnancially from your provider failing to cryopreserve you.
For example, if you name a nonsupportive family member as the contingent
beneﬁciary of your life insurance policy, that person will stand to gain tens or
hundreds of thousands of dollars by blocking your cryopreservation. Review your will,
cryopreservation agreement, life insurance policy, and any other relevant documents
to make sure you're avoiding situations like these. You may also want to look into "no
contest" clauses.

Protecting yourself in medical
emergencies
Max More and Chana Phaedra have already explained this well: 
Even if you have no risk of a third party preventing you from being cryopreserved,
you may not be in optimal condition for cryopreservation if you do not take care to
minimize certain risks. Particularly in certain medical scenarios, you may wish to
avoid extreme life-saving attempts or measures that may place you at high risk of
prolonged or repeated ischemic insult and brain damage.
This section deals with what you can do to avoid such situations, including executing
advance directives, and registering your desire to not undergo an autopsy. Read more
on this topic from Alcor and CI.
Healthcare advance directives (USA)
The two advance directives you should ﬁll out are a Living Will and a Durable
Power of Attorney for Health Care. The exact requirements vary from state to
state; generic state-speciﬁc documents can be obtained for free here or here. 
Alcor has a Cryonics Medical Power of Attorney form which is valid in most US states;
click here for the PDF or here for an editable version (just make a copy of the
Google doc). I also found this outdated Cryonics Living Will that might be a useful
reference.
After you have executed your advance directives, send copies to your cryonics
organization so that they know who has your power of attorney in an emergency. Also
give copies to your healthcare provider and attorney.
Living Will
A Living Will is not actually a will; it's a document that records the kind of medical
intervention you want to receive if you are unable to communicate your wishes due to
mental or physical incapacity. While hospitals sometimes ignore a Living Will, it's
useful to have one because it protects healthcare providers from liability if they carry
out your wishes. 
In some states it may not be possible to spell out your desire to be cryopreserved in a
Living Will; in those cases your Living Will should just refer to your Durable Power of
Attorney for Health Care for the details of your wishes. This also ensures that the two
documents don't contradict one another.
Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care
Alcor's explanation is good:
In a Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care, which is by far the more powerful
of the two documents, you give someone you trust the power to make medical
decisions for you in the event that you are incapacitated and unable to make such
decisions yourself. This person is your medical surrogate, also known as a health

care agent. The surrogate can make health care decisions with the same authority
as if you made them yourself, including decisions regarding withdrawal of life
support. Therefore you should be extremely careful about your choice. You should
also consider naming a secondary surrogate in case your ﬁrst choice is
unavailable.
We oﬀer these suggestions:
1. Your surrogate should be younger than you and in good health, to maximize
the chance that he or she will outlive you.
2. If you wish to be cryopreserved after death, your surrogate should be fully
informed about cryonics and very sympathetic toward cryonics.
3. Choose someone who is smart, highly motivated, and has good social skills.
You don't want your surrogate to alienate or antagonize medical personnel.
4. Although it is common to choose a spouse or close family member as your
surrogate, you may choose any other person as well. If you do not choose a
family member, that person should not be a beneﬁciary in your will who
might beneﬁt, or appear to beneﬁt, from your death.
5. Your surrogate cannot be an oﬃcer or employee of your cryonics
organization (but may be a member of your cryonics organization).
Note that if you do not choose a medical surrogate, your closest next of kin will
have that power by default. Even if you trust this family member to exercise
medical judgment wisely, you should still give that person explicit power of
attorney.
Hospitals can sometimes ignore a Living Will, but they ﬁnd it much more diﬃcult to
ignore someone with Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care. 
The question of resuscitation
Again via Alcor:
On one hand, cryonicists hope that medical staﬀ will not prolong life unnecessarily
if this will increase the risk of brain damage. Very often, a patient who is near
death may have low oxygen saturation, which could injure brain cells if it
continues for a long period. On the other hand, your cryonics organization will
want to be nearby to take immediate action after legal death is pronounced. If
Alcor has not had time to deploy a team, or if you are in a remote area, you may
want medical staﬀ to prolong your life until the team can arrive.
Recognizing this dilemma, you could consider putting a statement in your advance
directives such as, "If I am in a vegetative state, I wish life support to continue,
but only until the Alcor standby team is on-site and has stated that it is ready. If I
experience cardiac arrest after the Alcor standby team is ready, I do not wish to
be resuscitated."
Certiﬁcate of Religious Belief Objecting to
Autopsy (some US states)
Autopsies are really bad for your prospects of successful preservation, because they
not only introduce a lot of ischemic time, but may also directly damage your organs,
including your brain. 

In California, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, and Ohio, you can ﬁle a "Religious
Objection to Autopsy", which should signiﬁcantly decrease the probability of an
autopsy being performed on your body. In other states, you will need to rely on your
relatives, your cryonics organization, and the person with your Durable Power of
Attorney for Health Care to advocate for your wishes.
Alcor provides more details on avoiding autopsy here and here.
Communicating your intentions to
other parties
Discuss cryonics with your doctor, attorney,
and local coroner or medical examiner
These are all parties that may be involved in your death and the execution of your
will. You don't need to have long discussions with them where you discuss the
philosophical implications of cryonics or whatever; they just need to be aware of your
intentions and how that concretely aﬀects them.
Alcor says: "The best way of assuring that your wishes will be honored is to ﬁnd a
sympathetic doctor who has agreed to honor your wishes in advance. At the very
least, make sure your doctor has copies of your advance directives, and that your
hospital is given copies on admission."
Change your will
If you have made a will, make sure that it doesn't contain any statements that conﬂict
with your desire for cryopreservation. For example, my mom's original will stated that
she wanted to be cremated; something like this could present an obstacle to her
successful cryopreservation.
If you don't have a will, now is a good time to make one. Ideally your will should
include a section explaining and aﬃrming your outlook on cryonics and your desire for
cryopreservation after legal death.
Make a video
Alcor says that, in case of any dispute, "a video is the best possible evidence that you
made a fully informed decision." They encourage you to "make a short video in which
you describe your desire for cryopreservation calmly, rationally, and ﬁrmly." You
should send copies of this video to Alcor, your attorney, and the person who has your
Durable Power Of Attorney For Health Care.
They also encourage you to make the video with at least two witnesses present, and
to "make a new video at least every ﬁve years to reaﬃrm your preferences and
prevent anyone from suggesting that your video was obsolete because you changed
your mind after you made it."

Getting your family members signed
up
If you've talked to your family members about cryonics (as recommended above) and
they seem receptive to it, why not bring them to the future with you? You already
know how the signup process works, having gone through it yourself, and family of
existing members are eligible for certain discounts from both Alcor and CI.
Even if you don't get along with your family, surely there's someone who you'd like to
bring with you. I'm not nearly as passionate about cryonics as the time I've spent on
this sequence would suggest, but I do strongly believe that death is bad. If you love
people, you probably want them to not die. So I'm really lucky that my mom and sister
are signing up with me, and that several other people I know are signed up already.
See more at https://www.alcor.org/library/signing-up-your-relatives/.
Bringing assets into the future
Assuming things like currency and physical possessions still exist when you wake up,
you probably want to have some of those.
Creating a revival trust
I was not super interested in this myself, not being much one for ﬁnances or believing
in a future where things are suﬃciently similar to now that this will matter, so instead
of my usual detailed explanation, I'm going to give you a vetted list of links on this
topic.
Preserving assets
If you're signing up with Alcor, they have some existing structure in place for this:
Alcor's Multi-Investor Future Income Trust (minimum of $25,000)
Alcor's Asset Preservation Trust (minimum of $500,000)
If you're signing up with CI, consider going through ACS - you'll still ultimately get
preserved with CI, but ACS will establish and manage a reanimation fund for you. 
"ACS is [also] willing to hold money in trust or as a fund for individuals who do not
have their primary suspension arrangements with ACS" (source).
Additional information on how to establish a revival trust:
John Dedon: "Preserving Assets in Trusts for Clients Considering Cryonics"
John Dedon: "How to Take It With You"
John Dedon: "Functions of a Trust Protector during Biostasis and at the Time of
Cryogenic Revival"
Rick Durfee: "Cryonics Suspension Trust: The Ultimate Estate Freeze"
Rudi Hoﬀman: "The Hoﬀman Prototype Trust, and Ideas Regarding Cryonics
Estate Planning"

Preserving a legal identity
My insurance agent also said that "in order to have an identity in the future, you must
have a trust established that preserves some form of your identity (such as a social
security identity)." But, he also said some other things about the far future that I
thought were pretty confused, so that might be totally wrong. (To be clear he's great
at his job; this is not really part of his job.)
See also Christopher Sega's "Possible Legal Rights of Cryogenically Revived Persons."
Memorabilia storage
Alcor and CI both allow you to store personal eﬀects as a sort of rider on your
cryopreservation. You can store letters, videos, hard drives, whatever you want.
Cryonics Institute
CI requires members to sign a Memorabilia Storage Agreement and pay $1000 cash
upfront, non-refundable.
Alcor
Alcor oﬀers every member one 10"x12"x15" box for free and charges $250 for each
additional box. You can also contribute items to storage for members already under
cryopreservation at Alcor. Alcor Memory Boxes are kept in an underground commercial
storage facility in Kansas. 

Appendices to cryonics signup
sequence
This post is for reference and is not intended to stand alone. It may be periodically
updated with additional appendices.
Appendix A: Cryonics and x-risk
timelines
Over the past few years, some people have updated toward pretty short AGI timelines.
If your timelines are really short, then maybe you shouldn't sign up for cryonics,
because the singularity - good or bad - is overwhelmingly likely to happen before you
biologically die. But I bet you don't really believe that. You could already have terminal
cancer and not know it, or you could get hit by a car next year. If the singularity is
positive and results in the revival of those who got cryopreserved before it happened,
then even if you expect the singularity in like, two years, you really should sign up
without delay if there's any chance you might die before then (spoiler alert: there is). 
Alternatively, you might think that if timelines are longer than your lifespan it will be
because of some speciﬁc future sign (like a clear AI winter or a world war), and you
think it's a better tradeoﬀ to buy cryonics exactly when that sign shows up.
This particular point seemed like an important one to ﬂag, since this is one of the big
ways a lot of rationalists' models have changed since those older cryonics posts came
out, and we don't want people to make decisions wrongly based on cached thoughts.
Appendix B: Non life insurance
payment options
Alcor
In addition to life insurance, Alcor's membership application lists (1) trust, (2)
prepayment, (3) annuity, and (4) other means. These all fall under the umbrella of
'self-funding.' CI lets you pay in these ways as well. 
Trust
The Alcor Standard Trust "has been fully approved by Alcor ... and is therefore
immediately available in its existing format and content. [It] is designed to be entirely
autonomous from a member's estate, to provide secure Alcor membership funding."
You can fund a trust with stocks, treasury bonds, life insurance, federally insured
money market funds, cash, or other assets approved by Alcor. Linda Chamberlain (Co-
Founder of Alcor) is the head of the Trust Department and can guide you through the
Trust Approval Process.

Update 9/2022: A commenter reports:
I just contacted Alcor about paying with a trust and they wrote back "Alcor does
not accept Cryopreservation Funding Trusts at this time." It seems like life
insurance and prepayment are the only options.
Prepayment
If you have a bunch of cash lying around, like, way more than you'll ever ever need,
you can prepay out of pocket for your cryopreservation - just give the money to your
cryonics provider. They'll keep a portion of it for when you wake up, but for the rest of
this lifespan, you just won't have access to that money anymore. 
As far as I can calculate, this option is never cheaper than using life insurance, so you
should only do it if you are uninsurable (e.g. if you have already been diagnosed with
a terminal illness) or if you're in a huge hurry (e.g. you have less than six months left
to live)...
...or, I suppose, you could do it if a lump sum of a few hundred thousand dollars is
something it doesn't hurt you at all to give away, and you have literally no other use
for the money - not even to leave it to family or charity in your will.
Annuity
I don't really understand what an annuity is in this context, although I'm pretty sure
it's a thing that's paid in installments. If you want to pay with an annuity, contact Rudi
Hoﬀman.
Cryonics Institute
CI just has their own whole page on this, which I recommend you check out; there's
not much point in me just reproducing it all here. Their ways of funding are:
Revocable trust
Transfer on Death account
Prepayment
Prepayment to a third party
CI shares a long message from a member John de Rivaz on their funding page, under
the heading "Is life insurance the best way to fund a contract?", suggesting that they
recommend funding a CI contract through an investment trust. (For legal reasons,
they can't oﬃcially endorse de Rivaz's investment advice - same as how HR people
will always say "this is not tax advice, but...").
Appendix C: Additional resources
Let me just say that it is damn hard to stay on top of linkrot. 80% or more of the links I
followed for this section were either broken or just horribly outdated (e.g. forums that
hadn't been updated since 1997). I've used links to the Wayback Machine where
possible, but a lot of these pages are dynamic (forums and news updates) or are
useful because they link to a lot of other resources, and I didn't have the time to make
sure every single linked resource was in turn archived. 

International Cryonics Groups:
Europe:
Belgium: Cryonics Belgium
Finland: Suomen Kryoniikkaseura (KryoFin)
Germany: Cryonics Germany, German Society for Applied Biostasis
Greece: Greek Cryonics Society
Italy: Associazione Italiana Crionica
Netherlands: Dutch Cryonics Organization
Portugal: Alcor Portugal, Cryonics Portugal
Switzerland: CryoSuisse
UK: Cryonics UK
Elsewhere:
Australasia: The Cryonics Society of Australasia
Southern hemisphere: Southern Cryonics
Québec: CryoQuébec
Likely-outdated email contact info for additional groups available here.
Discussion groups:
r/cryonics
Alcor Member Forums
LessDead.com
Longecity
Young Cryonicists Facebook group
Informational websites:
Alcor News Archive
Alcor's Library
Ben Best's FAQ
Chronopause (Mike Darwin's blog)
CI News Archive
CI's Media Library
CI's Resource Library
CryoNet (forum archive)
Cryonics Europe (not up-to-date, but still useful)
The Cryonics Society
Cryonics Wiki
LessDead wiki
LessWrong's cryonics tag
r/cryonics wiki
Ralph Merkle's website
Scientiﬁc articles on cryonics (Alcor, PubMed)
Informational articles:

A History of Cryonics by Ben Best
A Physician Considers Cryonics by Dr. Steven Harris
Timeline of brain preservation
Wikipedia entry on Cryonics
Why Cryonics Makes Sense by Tim Urban

