
D&D.Sci
1. D&D.Sci
2. D&D.Sci Evaluation and Ruleset
3. D&D.Sci II: The Sorceror's Personal Shopper
4. D&D.Sci II Evaluation and Ruleset
5. D&D.Sci April 2021: Voyages of the Gray Swan
6. D&D.Sci April 2021 Evaluation and Ruleset
7. D&D.Sci May 2021: Monster Carcass Auction
8. D&D.Sci May 2021 Evaluation and Ruleset
9. D&D.Sci(-Fi) June 2021: The Duel with Earwax
10. D&D.Sci(-Fi) June 2021 Evaluation and Ruleset
11. D&D.Sci August 2021: The Oracle and the Monk
12. D&D.Sci August 2021 Evaluation and Ruleset

D&D.Sci
You are studying to become an Adventurer. You're excited to begin your Great Quest,
but also anxious: over a third of the graduates from your program fail to accomplish
their Great Quests. And if you're being brutally honest with yourself, your odds are
probably worse than that, since your stats - while about average for the general
population - are pretty lousy by the standards of Adventurer College.
STR: 6/20
CON: 14/20
DEX: 13/20
INT: 13/20
WIS: 12/20
CHA: 4/20
On the eve of your graduation, you're visited by a mysterious fairy oﬀering to add a
total of ten extra points to whichever attributes you most want to improve. Following
the college's standard mysterious fairy protocol, you humbly request a week for
research and contemplation before deciding how best to use this one-in-a-lifetime
opportunity. (Your low Charisma ensures you come oﬀ as simultaneously entitled and
disinterested when saying this, but she agrees regardless.)
The college Archivist provides you a complete but anonymised record of the stats of
everyone who graduated last year, and whether they succeeded at their Great Quests.
(The record-keeping is magically perfect, and as Great Quests never take more than a
year there are no incomplete Great Quests to account for.) The rest is up to you.
Where will you allocate those ten points?
I'll be posting an interactive letting you test your decision, along with a complete
explanation of the dataset, sometime next Saturday. I'm giving you a week, but the
task shouldn't take more than a few hours; use Excel, R, Python, random guessing, or
whatever other tools you think are appropriate. Let me know in the comments if you
have any questions about the scenario.
ETA: If you want to investigate this collaboratively with other lesswrongers (or just
share your conclusions without waiting a week), feel free to do so in the comments;
however, please use spoiler tags when sharing inferences, so people intending to ﬂy
solo can look for clariﬁcations without being spoiled.

D&D.Sci Evaluation and Ruleset
This is a followup to the D&D.Sci post I made a week ago; if you haven't already read
it, you should do so now before spoiling yourself.
Here is the web interactive I built to let you test your solution; below is a complete
explanation of the rules used to generate the dataset. You'll probably want to test
your answer before reading any further.
(Unless you'd prefer to enter your answer, then read through the rules with a slowly
growing sense of vindication and/or concern before clicking "Begin Quest!"; or unless
you'd like to completely ignore the spirit of the exercise and use the rules to improve
your solution. I'm not the boss of you.)
Ruleset
Generation and Selection
An applicant for Adventurer College gets their stats by rolling two ten-sided dice for
each stat and then adding them.
Not everyone who applies gets in. Only those with >60 total points are allowed entry;
you, with your 62 points, barely made the cut. Of course, you only get the records for
those who were accepted; this produces small but non-negligible selection eﬀects.
Advantage and Disadvantage
On graduation, an Adventurer will inevitably ﬁnd themselves in a party of 3-6 loyal
friends who help each other with their Great Quests. Your chances of success are
determined by how well you can contribute to a team like that (your Advantage), and
how much you get in their way (your Disadvantage). These quantities are calculated
as follows:
Everyone starts with 1 Advantage and 1 Disadvantage.
You can ignore the Dexterity score; in this world, it's useless for everything
Adventurers do except qualifying for Adventurer College.
Having unusually high stats allows you to help take skill checks for your team.
For every non-Dexterity skill you have above 12 points, add 2 Advantage for
every point it exceeds 12 by. (For example, if you had 15 Charisma, that would
give you (15-12)*2=6 extra Advantage.)
Having unusually low stats means you cause trouble for your team. For every
non-Dexterity skill you have below 8 points, add 3 Disadvantage for every point
under 8. (For example, if you had 5 Charisma, that would give you (8-5)*3=9
extra Disadvantage.)
If your Strength is greater than your Constitution, you'll end up committed to
physical tasks you don't have the stamina to see through: that's +2
Disadvantage.
For similar reasons, if your Intelligence is greater than your Wisdom, that's also
+2 Disadvantage.

Being able to out-talk the local Vizier (who has Charisma 16) is very useful.
Adventurers with >16 Charisma get an additional +5 Advantage.
Success and Failure
Your odds of success are the ratio between your Advantage and your Disadvantage.
That is:
P(Success) = Advantage / (Advantage + Disadvantage)
As Advantage and Disadvantage are both always >0, there is always a chance of
success or failure.
Strategy
With the above in mind, the optimal strategy given your starting position is as follows:
Get STR and CHA to 8.
Get WIS above INT.
Put your remaining skill points into WIS and/or CON and/or INT, while keeping
WIS above INT.
Closing Thoughts
You may have several objections to this scenario. Relevant selection eﬀects were only
vaguely alluded to, and the dataset contains phenomena - the discontinuity at
CHA>16, and the STR-CON interaction - irrelevant to your situation. To this, I can only
plead realism: most datasets in the real world are much messier, have much more
dubious relevance to your goals, and contain distortions about which the GM provides
no hints at all.
You may also object to the use of random elements in scoring. Even with perfect
allocation, you can't get above a 93.75% chance of success: it is not only possible, but
plausible, to do everything right and still lose. Meanwhile, refusing the fairy's oﬀer
leaves you a 25% chance of success, deliberately allocating points badly leaves you
about one chance in three, and most random allocations still give better-than-even
odds. I plead realism here too, but I can see why it might bother some people; as a
compromise, I provide probability-of-success alongside success/failure, in case you'd
prefer to keep score that way.
Finally, you may object to the ways that the challenge was unfair in your favour. If you
didn't account for selection eﬀects, you may have correctly avoided boosting DEX
because you thought it was actively harmful instead of merely useless. If you didn't
look for interactions, you may have dodged the WIS<INT penalty just because WIS
seemed like a better place to put points than INT. And I'm pretty sure even the three
people who submitted optimal answers on the last post (good job simon, seed, and
Ericf) didn't ﬁnd them by using the right link function, just because the linkage I set up
between predictors and response was so arbitrary and idiosyncratic.
Here, I not only excuse but congratulate myself. The main beneﬁt of exercises like this
over Kaggle analyses - aside from Fate's unwillingness to show up the following week

and explain the algorithm it used to choose who would survive the sinking of the
Titanic - is that making real-fake-world decisions based on real-fake-world data trains
the ability to make mistakes that don't hurt you.
(If you have any other objections, please let me know. I very much want feedback so I
can make the next challenge better.)

D&D.Sci II: The Sorceror's Personal
Shopper
The day's task shows up in an envelope, and not in glowing purple letters emblazoned
across the inside of your eyelids, which is usually a good sign. The owl that brought it
looks on with equanimity as you read its master's message:
Hello,
I hearde that you do odde jobs for Wizards. I neede 120 mana for a ritual but
cannot leave my Tower righte now. Go to the caravans in towne and buy enough
magic items that I can gette that much by sacriﬁcinge them.
My Owle has a pouch. It is biggere inside than oute. Putte the things in it ande she
will carrye them back.
Enclosed is my Thormo Tharmeu Magic Sensing Device. It usually lies but is
probably bettere than guessinge. Returne it when you are done. Enclosed is also a
list of 836 itemse I sacriﬁced and what coloure they glowed and how muche mana
I gotte and what the Thau Lying Box said when I pointede it at them. I like lists.
The pouch contains 200 gold pieces. You may keepe what coins are lefte over. If I
do notte gette at leaste 120 mana from the things you sende me, you shalle owe
me 200 gold pieces.
Goodbye,
Wakalix the Wizard
PS: If you do not accepte the jobbe, I bid you sende the Owle and the gold back
before sundown, that I may ﬁnde another to charge with it.
Your spirits lift with every line. Clear objectives, payment in advance,
acknowledgement that you have the right to refuse the task, no threats of involuntary
transformation, no random tangents about world domination or beard care,
handwriting legible, capitalization not entirely random . . . this is one of the good
clients. And if you make clever enough use of the list he provided, you suspect you
could end up taking home a decent fraction of that 200gp once this day's work is
done. With a song in your heart, you depart for the travelling caravans and their
magic items.
The selection of artefacts that greets you is as follows:
Item name
Glow color Thaumometer reading Price
Longsword of Wounding +2 Red
14
66gp
Warhammer of Justice +1
Yellow
5
41gp
Hammer of Capability
Blue
35
35gp
Pendant of Truth
Red
40
38gp
Ring of Joy +5
Blue
29
32gp
Warhammer of Flame +2
Yellow
48
65gp

Battleaxe of Glory
Blue
7
23gp
Plough of Plenty
Yellow
12
35gp
Saw of Capability +1
Green
16
35gp
Amulet of Wounding +2
Green
50
35gp
Pendant of Hope
Blue
77
34gp
Pendant of Joy +4
Green
42
39gp
 
Will you accept Wakalix's errand? If so, what will you buy?
I'll be posting an interactive letting you test your decision, along with an explanation
of how I generated the dataset, sometime this Sunday. I'm giving you a week, but the
task shouldn't take more than a few hours; use Excel, R, Python, tarot readings, or
whatever other tools you think are appropriate. Let me know in the comments if you
have any questions about the scenario.
If you want to investigate this collaboratively and/or call your decisions in advance,
feel free to do so in the comments; however, please use spoiler tags when sharing
inferences/strategies/decisions, so people intending to ﬂy solo can look for
clariﬁcations without being spoiled.

D&D.Sci II Evaluation and Ruleset
This is a followup to the D&D.Sci post I made earlier this week; if you haven't already
read it, you should do so now before spoiling yourself.
Here is the web interactive I built to let you test your solution; below is a complete
explanation of the rules used to generate the dataset. You'll probably want to test
your answer before reading any further.
(The generation process is more complex than last time, so I'm leaving some
extremely minor and irrelevant details out: feel free to dig through my code for the full
story if this bothers you.)
Ruleset
Item Types
A magic item is either a Weapon (Sword, Longsword, Warhammer, Battleaxe), Tool
(Plough, Saw, Hammer, Axe), or Trinket (Ring, Pendant, Amulet).
Abstractions
Every item has an abstraction (Wrath, Prosperity, etc.) assigned to it. Weapons are
randomly assigned Weaponish abstractions, Tools are randomly assigned Toolish
abstractions, and Trinkets are randomly assigned Weaponish or Toolish or Trinketish
abstractions. These abstractions have no eﬀect on other features, and are only
relevant to this exercise insofar as they make the demarcation of item types more
obviously meaningful.
Modiﬁers
Weapons are assigned modiﬁers (+1, +2, etc.) explaining how much more damage
the enchantment lets them inﬂict. This is both easily testable and tightly-regulated in-
universe: warriors can just swing their new Battleaxe of Wrath +2 at a training dummy
and conﬁrm it does 2 extra damage. This is potentially relevant to us because the
amount of extra damage is equal to mana/10 rounded down.
Non-Weapon items are also sometimes assigned modiﬁers; this is a marketing tactic
performed ad-hoc by salesmen with shaky or nonexistent justiﬁcation, and provides no
actual information.
Color and Mana
Enchanting an item randomly assigns it a color, and then randomly assigns it an
amount of mana via a process based on that color:
Red-enchanted items have 1d4*1d4*1d6 mana.

Blue-enchanted items have 1d6*1d10 mana.
Yellow-enchanted items have 17+1d4 mana.
Green-enchanted items have 2*1d20 mana.
The mean amount of mana for each color is near 20, but the variance varies a lot.
The Thaumometer
Wakalix did not read the instructions which came with his Thaumometer, and does not
realize it needs to be calibrated based on the size and color of an item. Unfortunately,
your lack of magical ability prevents you from adjusting it yourself.
It is currently optimized for Weapons and Tools which glow blue: its readings will only
be oﬀ by one when applied to them.
When applied to Trinkets which glow blue, it will consistently overestimate the amount
of mana present by 22, then be oﬀ by one from that position; for example, a Ring
which glows blue and has a reading of 52 will have either 29 or 31 mana.
For a non-blue Weapon or Tool, it will roll 1d6*1d10 and report the result, completely
disregarding the amount of mana present. For a Trinket, it will add 22 to this ﬁgure
before reporting.
Purchase History
On a given day, the caravans (the only local source of magic items) will have 4-5
randomly-generated Weapons, 2-3 randomly-generated Tools, and 5-6 randomly-
generated Trinkets. The value of Weapons is aﬀected by their mana content via their
modiﬁers; the value of other item types is completely uncorrelated with mana, since
mana level for Trinkets and Tools is both diﬃcult to detect and irrelevant for most
customers.
Since before he started his list, Wakalix's strategy when buying items for sacriﬁce has
been to trust in his wizardly intuition and buy whatever two items he feels are best
while disregarding cost; for the last 418 shopping trips, he has purchased two items
almost completely at random. His only limitation is that these two items will not share
a noun, abstraction, or modiﬁer (he believes this lowers his chances of coming home
with two low-mana items); selection eﬀects produced thus are irrelevant enough to
neglect.
(If you're wondering why I included selection eﬀects that didn't aﬀect the outcome,
it's because creating a dataset entirely without selection eﬀects would cause me to
turn to ash and blow away in the wind.)
Sacriﬁcing
When sacriﬁcing an item, Wakalix always harvests all of its mana, can always tell
exactly how much mana that is, and will always honestly report it. He's very reliable
like that.

Strategy
Using the Thaumometer, you can deduce the amount of mana every blue-glowing
object has to a tolerance of +/-1. You can also make use of the fact that yellow-
glowing objects never have less than 18 mana. Using this information, you can
guarantee >120 total mana by buying the Pendant of Hope, the Hammer of
Capability, the Plough of Plenty, and the Warhammer of Justice +1, leaving you with
55gp proﬁt.
(It is possible to do better than this by guessing randomly and being lucky. But given
the information provided, and given that you're trying to max your character's EV and
not your chances of topping the leaderboard, the above solution is optimal.)
Reﬂections
This challenge was intended primarily as a horrible, unfair trap for those inclined to
approach problems by throwing conventional ML algorithms at relevant datasets
without doing manual data exploration. My condolences to everyone who got caught
out, and my apologies to those who didn't: I'll endeavour to make future tricks harder
to dodge.
Congratulations to gjm and GuySrinivasan for producing my intended solution.
Congratulations also to everyone who produced my intended solution plus some
safety margin, to everyone who came up with a solution that made them a proﬁt, and
to everyone who chose to send the owl back when they couldn't ﬁnd a solution they
thought was worth gambling on.
(I really mean that last one, by the way. Making the best choice you can even if it
seems boring or counter-intuitive is an important life skill; and also, the fact that
people were willing to do this increases the variety of themes I can use in future
games.)
I have some mixed feelings about how puzzle-ish this challenge turned out: ideally, I
want challenges to have a smoother - or at least more natural - incentive gradient for
ﬁguring things out, but I couldn't ﬁnd a good way of doing that with this concept.
Feedback on this point would be greatly appreciated, as would feedback about
anything else about the challenge.
Scheduling
Week-long delays between posting a challenge and posting its solution don't seem
optimal; most of the action in the comments section happens in the ﬁrst few days
after I post, and I don't want to leave people waiting for most of a week after coming
to a ﬁnal conclusion (or worse, leave anyone nerdsniped for an entire ~168 hours). At
the same time, I want to ensure everyone has a chance to investigate before I reveal
the ruleset, and I want to be able to clear up questions about the premise while
people are still playing. I think the best way to balance this is to hold challenges over
shorter periods of time, and call these well in advance: to that end, I hereby commit
to posting the next challenge at 7pm UTC on Friday the 5th of March, and
resolve it at 11pm UTC the following Sunday.

(My much more tentative long-term plan is to post a challenge on the ﬁrst Friday of
every month for the rest of this year. We'll see how that goes.)

D&D.Sci April 2021: Voyages of the
Gray Swan
You were prepared for gratitude, a commendation from the Admiral, your own
department, parades in your name. You were also prepared to hear that your 'list of
helpful suggestions for ensuring supply ships survive random encounters' was an
impudent insult to the collective intellect of High Command, and receive a public
execution for your trouble. What you weren't prepared for was what happened: being
allocated a modest stipend, assigned to a vessel, and told that if you're so clever you
should implement your plans personally.
You have 100gp to spend, and your options are as follows:
Intervention
Cost
Coating the underside of the ship in shark repellent
would ensure that no journey would feature shark
attacks; however, Vaarsuvius' Law ("every trip
between plot-relevant locations will have exactly
one random encounter") means something else
would attack instead.
40gp
You've given up trying to understand what it is
about woodwork that makes its practitioners so
good at ﬁghting Crabmonsters, but your ﬁndings are
undeniable: arming the ship's carpenters would
halve the damage done by Crabmonster attacks.
20gp
Oﬀering tribute to the Merpeople would ensure they
won't attack the ship, similar to the eﬀect of shark
repellent.
45gp
There's enough space in the lower decks to add up
to twenty more oars, so when ﬂeeing is the best
option, the entire crew can work together to escape.
Each extra oar would decrease the damage done by
Krakens and Demon Whales by 2%.
1gp/oar
You wouldn't think these ships could ﬁt more
artillery, but clever ergonomics allow you to add up
to three more cannons. Your studies suggest each
cannon would reduce the damage suﬀered in Nessie
and Pirate attacks by 10%.
10gp/cannon
Arming the Crow's Nest with state-of-the-art riﬂes
would give lookouts a 70% chance of ensuring a
given Harpy attack does no damage.
35gp
Giving the deck crew novelty foam swords to wield
alongside their standard-issue cutlasses would
improve their eﬀectiveness when ﬁghting Water
Elementals, reducing the damage these creatures
do by 60%.
15gp
You're completely conﬁdent in the eﬀectiveness of your ideas, but much less conﬁdent
that you know which combination would make the best use of your limited budget. To

investigate this angle, you've procured a record of random encounters encountered by
the ships travelling your assigned route; unfortunately, it's missing some important
information for the ships that sank, due to everyone who could ﬁll in those details
being dead.
As you board the Gray Swan (why do they give these ships such charmingly unique
names when they're all built and operated identically?), it occurs to you that this
might have been intended as an execution after all. The dataset suggests that without
any of your clever plans, the survival rate for a journey along your route is a little
below 90%, and the Gray Swan is scheduled to make ten trips - ﬁve northbound
voyages, ﬁve southbound - in quick succession. Hopefully this indicates nothing more
than your superiors wanting to test your interventions very very thoroughly.
Your top priority is to save your skin. Secondary priorities are minimizing total damage
taken and spending as little gold as possible, to impress High Command and return to
their good graces.
What will you do?
(Notes:
As a passenger, you'll be kept away from any ﬁghts, but the Gray Swan has no
lifeboats; keeping the ship from sinking is necessary and suﬃcient to ensure
your survival.
Ships are fully repaired every time they make port.
Interventions stack such that two 10% reductions are equivalent to one 20%
reduction.
Interventions apply such that a 10% reduction to an attack that would do 80%
damage does 72% damage instead.
Each journey takes a month; it is currently Month 5, Year 1406.)
I'll be posting an interactive letting you test your decision, along with an explanation
of how I generated the dataset, sometime next Monday. I'm giving you a week, but
the task shouldn't take more than a few hours; use Excel, R, Python, a priori
knowledge, or whatever other tools you think are appropriate. Let me know in the
comments if you have any questions about the scenario.
If you want to investigate collaboratively and/or call your decisions in advance, feel
free to do so in the comments; however, please use spoiler tags or rot13 when sharing
inferences/strategies/decisions, so people intending to ﬂy solo can look for
clariﬁcations without being spoiled.

D&D.Sci April 2021 Evaluation and
Ruleset
This is a followup to the D&D.Sci post I made last week; if you haven't already read it, you
should do so now before spoiling yourself.
Here is the web interactive I built to let you evaluate your solution; below is an explanation
of the rules used to generate the dataset. You'll probably want to test your answer before
reading any further.
Ruleset
(Note: to make writing this easier, I'm using standard D&D dice notation, in which "3+4d8"
means "roll four eight-sided dice, sum the results, then add three".)
Enemies
Sharks
Sharks are 1/6 of encounters.
They attack in groups of 2+1d4, each of which does 1d10 points of damage.
Demon Whales

Demon Whales are 1/14 of encounters. (If that fraction seems high, you're failing to account
for all the sunk ships that couldn't report encountering them.)
An attack from a Demon Whale does 17d12 points of damage.
A Demon Whale encounter has a ~78% fatality rate
Crabmonsters
Crabmonsters are 1/14 of encounters.
A Crabmonster repeatedly rolls 1d80 as it tears through the ship, adding a point of damage
with each roll, until it rolls a 1 (that is, encounters someone or something that stops it).

~8% of Crabmonster encounters do >200% damage; a Crabmonster encounter
has a ~28% fatality rate
Pirates
Though the Navy's records don't bother to distinguish, Pirates come in two categories:
Brigands (local criminals who had the poor fortune to cross paths with Naval supply ships
while ﬂying the black ﬂag, and/or to mistake them for civilian cargo ships) and Privateers
(agents of an enemy government, harassing your Navy's ﬂeet using hit-and-run tactics).
Brigands are 1/6 of random encounters during your voyages, Privateers 1/21.
A ﬁght with Brigands does 4d8 points of damage; a ﬁght with Privateers does 6d12.

Merpeople
Surface-dwellers are unaware of the intricacies of underwater society, and record both
Atlantean Merfolk (1/14 of encounters) and Alexandrian Merfolk (2/21 of encounters) as

"Merpeople". Fortunately, the two city-states are close enough politically that befriending
one will cause them both to allow you free passage.
Atlanteans do 20+3d20 damage; Alexandrians do 1d8*1d8*1d8+1d20 damage.
~14% of Alexandrian attacks do >200% damage; an Alexandrian attack has a
~37% fatality rate

Kraken
Kraken are 2/21 of encounters.
They do 12d8 points of damage.
Nessie
Nessie is 1/21 of encounters.
She does 40+10d8 points of damage.

An encounter with Nessie has a ~2% fatality rate
Harpies
Harpies are 1/14 of encounters.
They do 1d4+1d8+1d12 points of damage.

Water Elementals
Water Elementals are 2/21 of encounters.
The Navy has countering the powerful but predictable attacks of Water Elementals down to
an art; there are well-known methods for ensuring they only almost destroy a given ship.
They do 73+1d12 points of damage.

Direction
Direction is irrelevant from perspectives both practical (you have no control over how many
trips you take each way) and epistemic (direction happens to have no eﬀect on outcomes).
Time eﬀects
Time has almost no eﬀect. The one exception is that Privateers used to be much more
common (and other encounters therefore slightly less common) before 4/1401; this is when
your nation's main rival changed tactics and stopped hiring mercenaries to attack supply
ships.
Sinking Risk by Enemy
In the absence of interventions, ~50% of shipwrecks are caused by Demon Whales, ~18% by
Crabmonsters, ~31% by Merpeople, ~1% by Nessie, and 0% by other threats.
Strategy
If attempting to optimize odds of survival, your best choices are to buy all oars, arm
carpenters, tribute the Merpeople, and buy one extra cannon; congratulations to simon,
GuySrinivasan and Measure for reaching this conclusion.
However, since Pirates never sink ships and Nessie is pretty bad at it, you may wish to take
the money you'd spend on the cannon and either hold onto it (to impress the Navy's
accountants) or spend it on foam swords (to impress the Navy's dockworkers).

Reﬂections
All else equal, there's a little extra uncertainty when predicting quantities instead of
categories: "is that sudden peak at 14% noise, or a clue to the generating function?", etc.
However, the main reason this challenge was so much more speculative than its
predecessors is that the most important information - details of attacks that did 100%+
damage - was censored by the mechanics of the world. In the absence of hard evidence,
small errors in inference compound, priors pick up the slack, and considerations like "what
genres apply here?" or "is the scenario designer enough of a troll to have Demon Whale
damage arbitrarily cap out at 99%?" take on a signiﬁcance they wouldn't otherwise.
This is both good and bad. Good because the personal touch adds intrigue to what would
otherwise just be data-wrangling; bad because every unit of eﬀort spent psychoanalyzing the
GM is a unit of eﬀort not spent on getting better at data-wrangling or on psychoanalyzing
reality's GM (i.e. studying Math and Science). I enthusiastically solicit feedback on this point,
as well as on every other point.
Scheduling
The next D&D.Sci challenge should be ready sometime earlyish next month, but nebulous
and open-ended work commitments mean I can't promise anything.

D&D.Sci May 2021: Monster Carcass
Auction
You are an apprentice to Carver, the most successful butcher in your tiny, snow-swept
village. Today, for the ﬁrst time since you joined her, she is sending you to buy
carcasses at the daily Auction.
(The (ﬁrst-price, sealed-bid) Monster Carcass Auction began as a collective eﬀort by
local shopkeepers to divert Adventurers from trying to sell them random corpses, but
has since become an integral part of the village economy, as well as the population's
main protein source.)
Carver thinks you should trust your instincts and bid however feels right. It's an
approach that's served her well thus far - the record you've been compiling of her
bids and subsequent sales attests to that, among other things - but you suspect a
more data-driven approach would work better. And if you do well enough on this
expedition, that might suﬃce to prove it to her.
You make sure to arrive at the very end of the event, like your boss always does; this
means you'll lose any tie-breakers - matching bids are resolved in favour of whoever
bid ﬁrst - but also means your rivals will have already put in their bids, so none of
them will be able to change their bidding strategy to account for Carver's absence.
The lots available are as follows:
Lot
Species
Days Since Death
#1
Yeti
0
#2
Snow Serpent 2
#3
Snow Serpent 1
#4
Winter Wolf
1
#5
Yeti
5
#6
Winter Wolf
1
#7
Snow Serpent 1
#8
Snow Serpent 5
#9
Winter Wolf
3
#10 Winter Wolf
7
#11 Winter Wolf
8
#12 Snow Serpent 8
#13 Winter Wolf
2
(As usual, this is all the information given to bidders; the original organizers took the
term 'blind auction' a little too literally, and by the time anyone realized, the practice
of hiding almost everything about the lots had become a tradition.)
You and your employer are risk-neutral, and don't care how much or little time and
eﬀort you spend butchering. You brought 400 silver pieces. How much will you bid for
each lot?

Notes:
Payments are collected in lot order; if you're unable to pay your bid by the time
a given lot comes up, you lose your claim to that lot but incur no penalty.
Your records are in no particular order, but the glacial pace of life in your village
suggests there are no time trends to account for.
I'll be posting an interactive letting you test your decision, along with an explanation
of how I generated the dataset, sometime next Friday. I'm giving you a week, but the
task shouldn't take more than a few hours; use Excel, R, Python, Ouija boards, or
whatever other tools you think are appropriate. Let me know in the comments if you
have any questions about the scenario.
If you want to investigate collaboratively and/or call your decisions in advance, feel
free to do so in the comments; however, please use spoiler tags or rot13 when sharing
inferences/strategies/decisions, so people intending to ﬂy solo can look for
clariﬁcations without being spoiled.

D&D.Sci May 2021 Evaluation and
Ruleset
This is a followup to the D&D.Sci post I made last week; if you haven't already read it, you
should do so now before spoiling yourself.
Here is the web interactive I built to let you evaluate your solution; below is an explanation
of the rules used to generate the dataset. You'll probably want to test your answer before
reading any further.
Ruleset
(Note: to make writing this easier, I'm using standard D&D dice notation, in which "4d8+3"
means "roll four eight-sided dice, sum the results, then add three".)
Species
The carcasses brought back by adventurers are 2/13 Yetis, 5/13 Snow Serpents, and 6/13
Winter Wolves.
Days Since Death
The days since each creature's death is modelled by rolling two d12s, taking the lowest
result, and subtracting 1.
(For the rest of this post, let "[DSD]" stand in for "Days Since Death".)
Butchery
Carver takes a "collect anything the local alchemists might pay for, then carve out all the
technically-edible meat you can still access" approach to her vocation.
The amount Carver gains from a Yeti carcass is given by 72+1d6-[DSD]d6, the amount from
a Snow Serpent is 20+2d6 (she can't prepare snakemeat, so all the proﬁt comes from non-
degrading components like scales and fangs; ergo, no time eﬀects), and the amount from a
Winter Wolf is 25-2*[DSD]+4d6.
Bidders
There are three bidders at a given auction: Alistair, Betty, and - except for today's auction,
where you take her place - your employer Carver.
Carver the Butcher
Carver bids 32-2*[DSD]+2d20 on Yeti carcasses, 7+2d10 on Snow Serpent carcasses, and
31-3*[DSD]+2d8 on Winter Wolf carcasses.

Alistair the Butcher
Alistair has a diﬀerent business model to Carver, focusing on extracting the highest quality
cuts and selling them to rich clients; as such, his utility sharply decreases with time since
death.
He is very predictable, bidding 55-6*[DSD] for Yetis, 60-20*[DSD] for Snow Serpents, and 50-
12*[DSD] for Winter Wolves.
Betty the Necromancer
Betty doesn't care how long something's been dead, so long as no-one's interfered with the
body.
She bids 29+1d6 on Yetis, 9+1d8 on Snow Serpents, and 19+1d4 on Winter Wolves.
Strategy
The relevant factors are summarized in these graphs.

In almost all cases where rivals aren't making bids greater than the Expected Value of the lot
to Carver, the EV-maximizing choice is to bid the lowest amount that would guarantee
winning the lot. The one exception is with lot #11, where it's possible to eke out a tiny
amount of extra EV by bidding 21 or 22 silver pieces.
Reﬂections
I aimed to make this entry as straightforward and approachable as I could. From the, uh,
comprehensiveness with which it was solved, I think it's fair to say I succeeded.
Congratulations to simon and GuySrinivasan for reaching perfect answers; and then,
between them, managing to deduce my entire generation process.

The main problem with this scenario from my point of view is that I once again ended up
making a puzzle when I was aiming for a challenge. It's premised on some Weird Crap
(distorting eﬀects of selection bias, auctions against rival agents) but the fact it needs a
'proper' solution obligates the Weird Crap to impose itself with a reliability it would never
possess in real life (Carver acts implausibly randomly to limit the eﬀect of selection bias,
opposing bidders are wind-up toys who don't know anything you don't), and so players
develop abilities optimized for synthetic problems.
I'm mad about this, but only a little. While my game failed to live up to my standards of
quote-unquote-'realism', it succeeded at its primary objectives: being playable, giving
players an excuse to practice technical skills, and setting things up for the Bonus Round
(which I'm pleased to report is absolutely not a puzzle).
Scheduling
Oh yeah, there's a Bonus Round. It's all written up and ready, but I'm delaying it slightly so I
can have it both be a week long and end on a weekend; I plan to run it starting next Monday
and conclude it the Monday after, unless I get hit by a truck or someone in the comments
gives me a reason to use a diﬀerent time window. Watch this space.

D&D.Sci(-Fi) June 2021: The Duel with
Earwax
It is dark in the submarine, and Maria isn't ready.
Maria isn't ready at all. Maria is in her usual post-battle fugue, disoriented,
dissociated, checked-out, can't come to the phone right now. Sending her to ﬁght in
this condition would be both homicide and suicide; also, your boss wouldn't let you.
Janelle, the backup pilot, is ready. That is, she's
physically/psychologically/pneumatologically prepared to go toe-to-toe with a soul-
eating monstrosity, throw Beta Resonance at it, and almost certainly die. But in the
sense of having a >5% chance to successfully protect herself and her colleagues from
the aforementioned soul consumption, Janelle is not ready.
There are four other viable volunteers: Amir, Corazon, Flint, and Will. None of these
pseudo-under-understudies have so much as a double-digit number of missions under
their belt, and none of them have ever faced an adversary half as strong as the one
you're dealing with. In other words, they're not ready either.
You are Ratio Tile, a scientist working at the Sphere, a deep-sea research facility
dedicated to studying mysterious - and frequently aggressive - accumulations of soul
energy called heteropneums. You are ready. Or, at least, you'd better be.
Three hours ago, ace pilot Maria N. returned from heading oﬀ a possible attack,
exorcising the oﬀending heteropneum so swiftly and thoroughly that your superiors
saw ﬁt to posthumously assign it the oﬃcial designation "Toast". Two hours ago, while
Maria was still catatonic, a heteropneum previously considered benign (amplitude: 3.2
kCept, designation: "Earwax") teleported onto the Sphere, ﬂooding half of the base
and injuring 21% of active personnel before dispersing. Sixteen minutes ago, sensor
readings indicated that Earwax is reforming. Your communications are down, and
there is no time to evacuate.
Dr. Cept was incapacitated in Earwax's ﬁrst attack. Cecelia is on her annual visit to the
surface, visiting friends and family, unaware of her colleagues' peril. In their absence,
the decision of which pilot to send and which type of Resonance they should use falls
to you and you alone.
Your boss seems to think that you can use Soul Coherence Theory to choose the
pilot/Resonance combination most likely to produce >3.2 kCept of Eﬀective Field
Strength and therefore save everyone. Unfortunately, Soul Coherence Theory
straightforwardly predicts that you're almost certainly all going to die; though it also
rules out such observed phenomena as Pseudo-Refraction, heteropneums with
amplitudes over 4.92 kCept (no, Cept, the instruments are not 'potentially unreliable'),
and - topically - heteropneums vanishing and reappearing the way Earwax did. So
instead, you're going to look at the data for all ﬁghts thus far with fresh eyes, treating
this as a pure analysis problem.
There is one other relevant factor. (Really, Ratio? You're pulling this now?) When a
pilot overwhelms a heteropneum by generating an Eﬀective Field Strength of more
than double its amplitude, you get readings of much greater precision, and can use
Branch-Loop Analysis to determine how much EFS would have been generated if the

pilot had used a diﬀerent Resonance. Earwax is exhibiting previously unseen
behaviours and abilities; if you can not only defeat but dominate it, you just know that
data will help you construct an alternative to Soul Coherence Theory. And this isn't
(just) your (boundless, inappropriate, potentially lethal) curiosity talking: ﬁguring out
how this creature works could be key to protecting the Sphere against future attacks.
You are Ratio Tile. You have ﬁve possible pilots, seven known Resonances, one
functioning submarine, and one chance. You are ready. Who will you send, and how
will you have them ﬁght?
Notes:
This challenge is fanﬁction of Nostalgebraist's Floornight, but having read it is
unlikely to help you achieve your desired outcome.
The change in genre is matched by some changes in my approach to data
generation. I will not be telling you what they are.
Your instruments have limited precision, but unerring accuracy. For example,
since they say Earwax has an amplitude of 3.2 kCept, you can be 100% sure the
true value is between 3.15 and 3.25 kCept; and since they say Janelle (would
have) generated 2.02 kCept of amplitude from Alpha Resonance in her most
recent ﬁght, you can be 100% sure the true value is between 2.015 and 2.025
kCept.
I'll be posting an interactive letting you test your decision, along with an explanation
of how I generated the dataset, sometime next Tuesday. I'm giving you a week, but
the task shouldn't take more than a few hours; use Excel, R, Python, the Summer
Diary, or whatever other tools you think are appropriate. Let me know in the
comments if you have any questions about the scenario.
If you want to investigate collaboratively and/or call your decisions in advance, feel
free to do so in the comments; however, please use spoiler tags or rot13 when sharing
inferences/strategies/decisions, so people intending to ﬂy solo can look for
clariﬁcations without being spoiled. Please also spoiler or rot13 any Floornight plot
points.

D&D.Sci(-Fi) June 2021 Evaluation and
Ruleset
This is a followup to the D&D.Sci post I made last week; if you haven't already read it, you
should do so now before spoiling yourself.
Here is the web interactive I built to let you evaluate your solution; below is an explanation
of the rules used to generate the dataset. You'll probably want to test your answer before
reading any further.
Ruleset
This challenge runs mostly on Poisson distributions; the rest of this post will abbreviate "Take
the result of a Poisson process with lambda=X" as "Po(X)".
Heteropneums
There are two types of heteropneum. The most common is the garden-variety heteropneum,
which exists as a natural consequence of the way soul energy clusters. This type has a
randomly-generated amplitude which is always a multiple of 0.142 kCept. (You can infer that
Earwax must not be of this kind because no amplitude which would round to 3.2 kCept is a
multiple of 0.142 kCept.)
There are also a much smaller number of [Teeming] heteropneums, which exist because the
[Teeming] hivemind does. These appear at times and with intensities not determined by the
rules of this world (in other words, decided arbitrarily by the GM). Nicholas, Neville, Jasper,
Athena, Endeavour, Spindle, Divisor, Desk, Pencil, Duchess, Economy, Sirocco, Constellation,
Harbinger, Minimalist, Spackle, Tourniquet, Painting, Toast, and most importantly Earwax are
[Teeming] heteropneums; all others are not.
Who Fights What
Heteropneums with amplitudes of >2.5 kCept are handled by Maria. Heteropneums in the
1.2-2.5 kCept range are split evenly between Maria and Janelle. Weaker heteropneums are
allocated unevenly between all viable pilots.
Fighting (as Maria)
Let A be the amplitude of the heteropneum Maria is facing, in kCept.
Alpha
Alpha Resonance lets Maria create 3.4444 + 0.0285*Po(10.2) kCept of Eﬀective Field
Strength. On Floorday 502, a breakthrough was made which allowed the Sphere's
submarines to better utilize this form of Resonance; this adds an extra 0.5111 kCept.

Beta
Beta Resonance lets Maria create 2.4011 + 0.1034*Po(3.9) kCept of Eﬀective Field Strength.
Gamma
Gamma Resonance gets stronger as the enemy does. It lets Maria create 0.6626 +
A*0.66*Po(1.1) kCept of Eﬀective Field Strength.


Delta
Delta Resonance is Maria's preferred means of attacking. It lets her create A*0.32 + 3.253 +
0.0882*Po(19.2) kCept of Eﬀective Field Strength.
Epsilon
Epsilon Resonance has a complex but predictable eﬀect. It lets Maria create 0.46 - 1.12*A +
0.93*A^2 - 0.14*A^3 kCept of Eﬀective Field Strength.

Zeta
Zeta Resonance randomly fails and produces 0kCept 22% of the time. When it succeeds, it
lets Maria create 2.1571 kCept of EFS against an ordinary heteropneum, or 7.5311 kCept
against a [Teeming] heteropneum.
Eta
Eta Resonance varies sharply and arbitrarily with time, as shown below.

Fighting (as anyone else)
Every pilot/Resonance combination has a factor representing how well that pilot handles that
resonance compared to Maria. The EFS they generate is always the EFS Maria would
generate multiplied by that factor. All factors are tabulated below.
 
Janelle Amir Corazon Flint Will
Alpha
0.48
0.50 0.59
0.42 0.23
Beta
0.98
0.72 0.11
0.32 0.55
Gamma 1.34
0.42 0.58
0.36 0.14
Delta
0.24
0.34 0.16
0.32 0.21
Epsilon 0.79
0.78 0.35
1.23 2.11
Zeta
0.43
0.41 0.92
0.39 0.12
Eta
0.45
0.23 0.12
1.08 0.95
Strategy
Once you know everything about this system, the two dominant solutions are to have Will
use Epsilon Resonance (100% chance to live), or have Corazon use Zeta Resonance (22%
chance to die, 78% chance to live and replace Soul Coherence Theory). However, the small
amount of data you were provided may not have been enough for you to conﬁdently assess
how reliably Zeta Resonance works on [Teeming] heteropneums, and/or you may have
suspected that Earwax is unique enough that Zeta Resonance wouldn't treat it like other
[Teeming]s; thus, you may have reasonably opted for having Janelle use Gamma Resonance
(~33% chance to die, ~37% chance to live but keep SCT, ~30% chance to live and replace
SCT). Ultimately, your choice depends on your values and your circumrational reasoning.
(You may also choose to sabotage the ﬁght and kill everyone. But why would a Sphere
scientist ever do something like that?)
Reﬂections
This scenario was a puzzle; for once, I think that's justiﬁed. When dealing with a problem
rooted in (Meta)Physics and (Xeno)Biology instead of Economics and Sociology, exact
predictions become sensible goals and sophisticated modelling becomes a valid tactic. The
fact that it had three intended solutions made me comfortable turning up the diﬃculty for
this one: congratulations to everyone who found at least one answer, and particular
congratulations to simon for ﬁnding the two optimal ones.
This scenario was also fanﬁction. It . . . probably shouldn't have been. I had hoped that using
someone else's canon would let me borrow gravitas, cut down on exposition, and enable
players' pre-existing attitudes towards the characters both motivate and bias them. This was
undercut somewhat by the fact that - to my surprise - literally 0% of players seem to have
read Floornight (in my defence, it was big on rationalist tumblr!). But the main problems
were inherent to the idea: it's hard to write an introduction such that it works for both fans
and non-fans, ~700 words of problem description just isn't enough for me to successfully
cloud people's judgement, and the whole "solve this puzzle or your husbando gets it!"
conceit seems tacky in hindsight (especially given I didn't invent the husbando in question).
Next time I do a D&D.Sci challenge as fanﬁc, I'll pick a less obscure story; and next time I try
to inﬂict Feels on you, I'll use both a better format and original characters.
Finally, this scenario was Sci-Fi, with capital letters and everything. No dungeons, no
dragons, no questing heroes, and most importantly no dicerolls. I'm conﬂicted both about

whether Sci-Fi is less likely than Fantasy to alienate potential players, and about whether
using 'grown-up' distributions that could conceivably show up in players' dayjobs is an
improvement over my usual approach.
. . . this is typically the part where I say "Feedback on these points, and on all other points, is
enthusiastically solicited", but it's possible Nostalgebraist might read this and I want him to
think I'm cool. Therefore: I cooly solicit cool feedback on these cool points (in a cool sort of
way).
Scheduling
I've just started a new job. This shouldn't interfere with making July's challenge - especially
since I've done all the conceptual work for it already - but unexpected delays are a lot more
likely. Best guess: I'll post it towards the end of next month.

D&D.Sci August 2021: The Oracle and
the Monk
You are Oeis the Wise, professional Oracle. Your uncanny ability to predict how lists of
whole numbers will continue - and only how lists of whole numbers will continue -
creates infrequent but intense demand for your counsel: you usually leave your
mountain home about once a month, whenever circumstances place a local noble or
merchant lord in need of your services.
Today's customer is Morgan, a monk. (Morgan has no money, but his temple has
frequently provided you with food and shelter while travelling to more lucrative
clients, so you're ﬁne doing this one for free.)
Morgan explains that he uses transcendental meditation to link himself to the
substructure of the universe, observing the pulse and ﬂicker of those lights which cast
all we know as shadows. In his notes, he records ﬂows of mana as they rise and ebb,
forming the rhythms that undergird reality.
You tell him that sounds cool and you hope it works out for him.
However, Morgan continues, a recent supernova of unusual intensity has disrupted
the leylines of the world, creating the possibility of ﬂux in realms which have
previously known only stasis. In ten days - day 384 in his record - he will have a once-
in-several-lifetimes chance to not merely channel these ﬂows, but change them: he
plans to invoke two mana types simultaneously, wielding them in a ritual that subtly
but profoundly reshapes the world for the better. If he is to do this, he must begin the
endeavour now; to determine which sources of power he should prepare to conjure on
that fateful day, he zealously entreats your assistance.
You tell him that sounds cool and you hope it works out for him. (Living alone on a
mountain has not done wonders for your conversational repertoire.)
Morgan concludes by saying that his priorities for day 384 are as follows:
Firstly, the strongest of the two mana types he channels cannot be Void, Doom,
or Spite. These may be used if you are certain they will be the weaker of the
pair, but if they dominate, darkness will possess him and he will transform into
an immortal demon, wreaking horror and bloodshed upon the world he sought to
improve.
Secondly, the ritual must work. For this to occur, the two mana types together
must have a combined power of at least 70.
Finally, as a strictly tertiary objective, increasing the total amount of mana
channelled would allow him to increase the amount of good done; however, this
is much less important than guaranteeing the ritual works at all.
From the dedication in his eyes, you perceive Morgan will not be persuaded from this
path: all you can do is ensure he walks it as best he can. You are Oeis the Wise, and
you have a title to uphold. What, in your Oeisdom Wisdom, will you advise him to do?
I'll be posting an interactive letting you test your decision, along with an explanation
of how I generated the dataset, sometime next Friday on Monday the 23rd. I'm giving

you a week, but the task shouldn't take more than a few hours; use Excel, R, Python,
Shivers, Inland Empire, Espirit de Corps, or whatever other tools you think are
appropriate. Let me know in the comments if you have any questions about the
scenario.
If you want to investigate collaboratively and/or call your decisions in advance, feel
free to do so in the comments; however, please use spoiler tags or rot13 when sharing
inferences/strategies/decisions, so people intending to ﬂy solo can look for
clariﬁcations without being spoiled.

D&D.Sci August 2021 Evaluation and
Ruleset
This is a followup to the D&D.Sci post I made ten days ago; if you haven't already read it,
you should do so now before spoiling yourself.
Here is the web interactive I built to let you evaluate your solution; below is an explanation
of the rules used to generate the dataset. You'll probably want to test your answer before
reading any further.
Ruleset
Below is a summary of how the dataset works; full generation code is available here.
(Note: to make writing this easier, I'm using standard D&D dice notation, in which "4d8+3"
means "roll four eight-sided dice, sum the results, then add three".)
Mana types
Solar
Solar is the strongest and most complicated mana type. It can be decomposed into an
average (40), a small amount of random noise (+ 1d2 - 1d2), two seasonality components,
and the eﬀects of distant supernovae.

The power of Solar on Day 384 is 45 + 1d2 - 1d2
Lunar
The moon reﬂects and inverts the eﬀects of the sun, with a delay. It provides a power of 75
minus the amount of Solar power 14 days ago.
The power of Lunar on Day 384 is 16, because the power of Solar on Day 370 was 59.
Earth and Ocean

Earth and Ocean combine to create the World. World Mana can be decomposed into an
average (68), some random noise (1d4 - 1d4), and a seasonality eﬀect.
On a given day, Earth takes (15+1d80)% of World Mana, rounded down; Ocean gets the rest.
The combined power of Earth and Ocean on Day 384 is 77 + 1d4 - 1d4.
Breeze
The breeze varies, as does its variance. It is composed of an average (13), and some random
noise which varies seasonally (1dN - 1dN, where N is given in the graph below).

The power of Breeze on Day 384 is 13 + 1d4 - 1d4
Flame
Flame catches, sputters and starts, building and waning randomly. Today's Flame mana is
yesterday's, minus 25% (rounded down), plus the lowest of two d20 rolls.
The spread of possibilities at Day 384 looks like this:
Ash
Ash is what remains when Flame is extinguished. Today's Ash is the 25% removed from
yesterday's Flame.
The spread of possibilities at Day 384 looks like this:

Void
Void is timeless; all motion within it is random, and all apparent trends or correspondences
are merely noise. The power of Void on Day 384 - and all other days - is 24+1d8-1d8.
Doom
Doom builds gradually, then diminishes sharply as it is fulﬁlled. On a typical day, it can be
decomposed into a starting point (24), some random noise (1d6), and a jagged seasonality
eﬀect.

However, there have been four recorded days - 34, 91, 181 and 249 - where the die rolled
an impossible value. There's a 99% chance that this is due to natural disasters, to Morgan's
pure heart and optimism making him slightly unreliable at quantifying Doom ﬂows, or to
some other innocuous explanation . . . and a 1% chance that this is due to the demon lord
Astaroth modifying Doom whenever he detects a mortal using it in a ritual. As such, the
power of Doom on Day 384 has a 99% chance of being 27+1d6, and a 1% chance of being
one unit greater than whatever other mana ﬂow Morgan channels.
(In my defense, I did literally call it 'Doom'.)
Spite
Spite lays dormant, then explodes brieﬂy, only to become silent again. Its default power is 0;
to this we add 13, 7, 18 and 6 at 4-, 5-, 7- and 14-day intervals respectively.
On Day 384, Spite is 0.
Strategy
The only strategy which ensures Morgan's success is using Earth and Ocean. However, you
don't have to share his priorities, and you had no way of knowing that there would be no
supernova eﬀect on Day 384. As such, taking an unknown risk to gain an unknown beneﬁt in
the form of Doom and Solar is also a not-strictly-dominated answer; for that matter, you
could also prioritize best-case outcomes over guaranteed successes by suggesting Solar and
Earth, or sabotage the ritual by advising him to use (to give one example) Lunar and Doom.
Reﬂections
The premise for this challenge was speciﬁed by GuySrinivasan, as a prize for winning an
earlier game. He asked for a scenario about chronological eﬀects: I built a system of
autocorrelations, lagging and leading indicators, overlapping seasonalities, transient
anomalies, and factors which turn out to actually just be random, all overshadowed by the
potential for Black Swan events.
One thing I did not include was any overall time trends: Morgan and Oeis' world is naturally
one of stasis, cycles, and noise. Congratulations to everyone who successfully enabled them
to change it, and particular congratulations to aphyer for reaching the intended solution
within three hours (!) of the challenge being posted.
Using someone else's premise was unexpectedly pleasant: there's a lot of fun to be had
working around arbitrary but lenient constraints, and I appreciated the guarantee that at
least one player would appreciate the subject matter chosen. As such, I conclude this section
by soliciting both feedback on this challenge and suggestions for what you'd like to see in
future ones.
Scheduling
. . . speaking of which, I'm sorry to say you're unlikely to see much from me for a while. I'm
about to begin an intense and protracted piece of contract-work, and I don't know how much
attention I'll be able to spare for this hobby of mine. I hope to get the next entry done
sometime in October, but it's entirely possible this will be the last D&D.Sci challenge posted
this year.

(If this state of aﬀairs bothers you, you are warmly encouraged to amend it: all my work is
public domain, and I never planned to be the sole custodian of this genre. I look forward to
investigating whatever scenarios you ﬁnd the time and inspiration to construct.)

