
Economics and Eﬃciency
1. Against Tulip Subsidies
2. Considerations On Cost Disease
3. Highlights From The Comments On Cost Disease
4. The Price Of Glee In China
5. Things Probably Matter
6. How The West Was Won
7. The Lizard People Of Alpha Draconis 1 Decided To Build An Ansible
8. A Modern Myth

Against Tulip Subsidies
I.
Imagine a little kingdom with a quaint custom: when a man likes a woman, he oﬀers
her a tulip; if she accepts, they are married shortly thereafter. A couple who marries
sans tulip is considered to be living in sin; no other form of proposal is appropriate or
accepted.
One day, a Dutch trader comes to the little kingdom. He explains that his homeland
also has a quaint custom involving tulips: they speculate on them, bidding the price
up to stratospheric levels. Why, in the Netherlands, a tulip can go for ten times more
than the average worker earns in a year! The trader is pleased to ﬁnd a new source of
bulbs, and oﬀers the people of the kingdom a few guilders per tulip, which they
happily accept.
Soon other Dutch traders show up and start a bidding war. The price of tulips goes up,
and up, and up; ﬁrst dozens of guilders, then hundreds. Tulip-growers make a fortune,
but everyone else is less pleased. Suitors wishing to give a token of their love ﬁnd
themselves having to invest their entire life savings - with no guarantee that the
woman will even say yes! Soon, some of the poorest people are locked out of
marriage and family-raising entirely.
Some of the members of Parliament are outraged. Marriage is, they say, a human
right, and to see it forcibly denied the poor by foreign speculators is nothing less than
an abomination. They demand that the King provide every man enough money to
guarantee he can buy a tulip. Some objections are raised: won't it deplete the
Treasury? Are we obligated to buy everyone a beautiful ﬂawless bulb, or just the
sickliest, grungiest plant that will technically satisfy the requirements of the ritual? If
some man continuously proposes to women who reject him, are we obligated to pay
for a new bulb each time, subsidizing his stupidity?
The pro-subsidy faction declares that the people asking these question are well-oﬀ,
and can probably aﬀord tulips of their own, and so from their place of privilege they
are trying to raise pointless objections to other people being able to obtain the
connubial happiness they themselves enjoy. After the doubters are tarred and
feathered and thrown in the river, Parliament votes that the public purse pay for as
many tulips as the poor need, whatever the price.
A few years later, another Dutch trader comes to the little kingdom. Everyone asks if
he is there to buy tulips, and he says no, the Netherlands' tulip bubble has long since
collapsed, and the price is down to a guilder or two. The people of the kingdom are
very surprised to hear that, since the price of their own tulips has never stopped going
up, and is now in the range of tens of thousands of guilders. Nevertheless, they are
glad that, however high tulip prices may be for them, they know the government is
always there to help. Sure, the roads are falling apart and the army is going hungry for
lack of rations, but at least everyone who wants to marry is able to do so.
Meanwhile, across the river is another little kingdom that had the same tulip-related
marriage custom. They also had a crisis when the Dutch merchants started making
the prices go up. But they didn't have enough money to aﬀord universal tulip
subsidies. It was pretty touch-and-go for a while, and a lot of poor people were very
unhappy.

But nowadays they use daﬀodils to mark engagements, and their economy has never
been better.
II.
In America, aspiring doctors do four years of undergrad in whatever area they want (I
did Philosophy), then four more years of medical school, for a total of eight years post-
high school education. In Ireland, aspiring doctors go straight from high school to
medical school and ﬁnish after ﬁve years.
I've done medicine in both America and Ireland. The doctors in both countries are
about equally good. When Irish doctors take the American standardized tests, they
usually do pretty well. Ireland is one of the approximately 100% of First World
countries that gets better health outcomes than the United States. There's no
evidence whatsoever that American doctors gain anything from those three extra
years of undergrad. And why would they? Why is having a philosophy degree under
my belt supposed to make me any better at medicine?
(I guess I might have acquired a talent for colorectal surgery through long practice
pulling things out of my ass, but it hardly seems worth it.)
I'll make another confession. Ireland's medical school is ﬁve years as opposed to
America's four because the Irish spend their ﬁrst year teaching the basic sciences -
biology, organic chemistry, physics, calculus. When I applied to medical school in
Ireland, they oﬀered me an accelerated four year program on the grounds that I had
surely gotten all of those in my American undergraduate work. I hadn't. I read some
books about them over the summer and did just ﬁne.
Americans take eight years to become doctors. Irishmen can do it in four, and achieve
the same result. Each year of higher education at a good school - let's say an Ivy,
doctors don't study at Podunk Community College - costs about $50,000. So American
medical students are paying an extra $200,000 for...what?
Remember, a modest amount of the current health care crisis is caused by doctors'
crippling level of debt. Socially responsible doctors often consider less lucrative
careers helping the needy, right up until the bill comes due from their education and
they realize they have to make a lot of money right now. We took one look at that
problem and said "You know, let's make doctors pay an extra $200,000 for no
reason."
And to paraphrase Dirkson, $200,000 here, $200,000 there, and pretty soon it adds up
to real money. 20,000 doctors graduate in the United States each year; that means
the total yearly cost of requiring doctors to have undergraduate degrees is $4 billion.
That's most of the amount of money you'd need to house every homeless person in
the country ($10,000 to house one homeless x 600,000 homeless).
I want to be able to say people have noticed the Irish/American discrepancy and are
thinking hard about it. I can say that. Just not in the way I would like. Many of the
elder doctors I talked to in Ireland wanted to switch to the American system. Not
because they thought it would give them better doctors. Just because they said it was
more fun working with medical students like myself who were older and a little wiser.
The Irish medical students were just out of high school and hard to relate to - us
foreigners were four years older than that and had one or another undergraduate
subject under our belts. One of my attendings said that it was nice having me around

because I'd studied Philosophy in college and that gave our team a touch of class. A
touch of class!
This is why, despite my reservations about libertarianism, it's not-libertarianism that
really scares me. Whenever some people without skin in the game are allowed to
make decisions for other people, you end up with a bunch of elderly doctors getting
together, think "Yeah, things do seem a little classier around here if we make people
who are not us pay $200,000, make it so," and then there goes the money that should
have housed all the homeless people in the country.
But more important, it also destroyed my last shred of hope that the current mania for
requiring college degrees for everything had a good reason behind it.
III.
The only reason I'm picking on medicine is that it's so clear. You have your
experimental group in the United States, your control group in Ireland, you can see
the lack of diﬀerence. You can take an American doctor and an Irish doctor, watch
them prescribe the same medication in the same situation, and have a visceral feel
for "Wait, we just spent $200,000 for no reason."
But it's not just medicine. Let me tell you about my family.
There's my cousin. He wants to be a ﬁreﬁghter. He's wanted to be a ﬁreﬁghter ever
since he was young, and he's done volunteer work for his local ﬁre department, who
have promised him a job. But in order to get it, he has to go do four years of college.
You can't be a ﬁreﬁghter without a college degree. That would be ridiculous. Back in
the old days, when people were allowed to become ﬁreﬁghters after getting only
thirteen measly years of book learning, I have it on good authority that several major
states burnt to the ground.
My mother is a Spanish teacher. After twenty years teaching, with excellent reviews by
her students, she pursued a Masters' in Education because her school was going to
pay her more money if she had it. She told me that her professors were incompetent,
had never actually taught real students, and spent the entire course pushing whatever
was the latest educational fad; however, after paying them thousands of dollars, she
got the degree and her school dutifully increased her salary. She is lucky. In several
states, teachers are required by law to pursue a Masters' degree to be allowed to
continue teaching. Oddly enough, these states have no better student outcomes than
states without this requirement, but this does not seem to aﬀect their zeal for this
requirement. Even though many rigorous well-controlled studies have found that
presence of absence of a Masters' degree explains approximately zero percent of
variance in teacher quality, many states continue to require it if you want to keep your
license, and almost every state will pay you more for having it.
Before taking my current job, I taught English in Japan. I had no Japanese language
experience and no teaching experience, but the company I interviewed with asked if I
had an undergraduate degree in some subject or other, and that was good enough for
them. Meanwhile, I knew people who were ﬂuent in Japanese and who had high-level
TOEFL certiﬁcation. They did not have a college degree so they were not considered.
My ex-girlfriend majored in Gender Studies, but it turned out all of the high-paying
gender factories had relocated to China. They solved this problem by going to App
Academy, a three month long, $15,000 course that taught programming. App

Academy graduates compete for the same jobs as people who have taken computer
science in college, a four year long, $200,000 undertaking.
I see no reason to think my family and friends are unique. The overall picture seems
to be one of people paying hundreds of thousands of dollars to get a degree in Art
History to pursue a job in Sales, or a degree in Spanish Literature to get a job as a
middle manager. Or not paying hundreds of thousands of dollars, if they happen to be
poor, and so being permanently locked out of jobs as a ﬁreﬁghter or salesman.
IV.
So presidential candidate Bernie Sanders has proposed universal free college tuition.
On the one hand, I sympathize with his goals. If you can't get any job better than 'fast
food worker' without a college degree, and poor people can't aﬀord college degrees,
that's a pretty grim situation, and obviously unfair to the poor.
On the other hand, if can't you get married without a tulip, and poor people can't
aﬀord tulips, that's also a pretty grim situation, and obviously unfair to the poor.
But the solution isn't universal tulip subsidies.
Higher education is in a bubble much like the old tulip bubble. In the past forty years,
the price of college has dectupled (quadrupled when adjusting for inﬂation). It used to
be easy to pay for college with a summer job; now it is impossible. At the same time,
the unemployment rate of people without college degrees is twice that of people who
have them. Things are clearly very bad and Senator Sanders is right to be concerned.
But, well, when we require doctors to get a college degree before they can go to
medical school, we're throwing out a mere $5 billion, barely enough to house all the
homeless people in the country. But Senator Sanders admits that his plan would cost
$70 billion per year. That's about the size of the entire economy of Hawaii. It's enough
to give $2000 every year to every American in poverty.
At what point do we say "Actually, no, let's not do that, and just let people hold basic
jobs even if they don't cough up a a hundred thousand dollars from somewhere to get
a degree in Medieval History"?
I'm afraid that Sanders' plan is a lot like the tulip subsidy idea that started oﬀ this
post. It would subsidize the continuation of a useless tradition that has turned into a
speculation bubble, prevent the bubble from ever popping, and disincentivize people
from ﬁguring out a way to route around the problem, eg replacing the tulips with
daﬀodils.
(yes, it is nice to have college for non-economic reasons too, but let's be honest - if
there were no such institution as college, would you, totally for non-economic reasons,
suggest the government pay poor people $100,000 to get a degree in Medieval
History? Also, anything not related to job-getting can be done three times as quickly
by just reading a book.)
If I were Sanders, I'd propose a diﬀerent strategy. Make "college degree" a protected
characteristic, like race and religion and sexuality. If you're not allowed to ask a job
candidate whether they're gay, you're not allowed to ask them whether they're a
college graduate or not. You can give them all sorts of examinations, you can ask
them their high school grades and SAT scores, you can ask their work history, but if

you ask them if they have a degree then that's illegal class-based discrimination and
you're going to jail. I realize this is a blatant violation of my usual semi-libertarian
principles, but at this point I don't care.

Considerations On Cost Disease
I.
Tyler Cowen writes about cost disease. I'd previously heard the term used to refer only
to a speciﬁc theory of why costs are increasing, involving labor becoming more
eﬃcient in some areas than others. Cowen seems to use it indiscriminately to refer to
increasing costs in general - which I guess is ﬁne, goodness knows we need a word for
that.
Cowen assumes his readers already understand that cost disease exists. I don't know
if this is true. My impression is that most people still don't know about cost disease, or
don't realize the extent of it. So I thought I would make the case for the cost disease
in the sectors Tyler mentions - health care and education - plus a couple more.
First let's look at primary education:
There was some argument about the style of this graph, but as per Politifact the basic
claim is true. Per student spending has increased about 2.5x in the past forty years
even after adjusting for inﬂation.
At the same time, test scores have stayed relatively stagnant. You can see the full
numbers here, but in short, high school students' reading scores went from 285 in
1971 to 287 today - a diﬀerence of 0.7%.
There is some heterogenity across races - white students' test scores increased 1.4%
and minority students' scores by about 20%. But it is hard to credit school spending
for the minority students' improvement, which occurred almost entirely during the
period from 1975-1985. School spending has been on exactly the same trajectory
before and after that time, and in white and minority areas, suggesting that there was
something speciﬁc about that decade which improved minority (but not white) scores.
Most likely this was the general improvement in minorities' conditions around that
time, giving them better nutrition and a more stable family life. It's hard to construct a
narrative where it was school spending that did it - and even if it did, note that the
majority of the increase in school spending happened from 1985 on, and
demonstrably helped neither whites nor minorities.
I discuss this phenomenon more here and here, but the summary is: no, it's not just
because of special ed; no, it's not just a factor of how you measure test scores; no,
there's not a "ceiling eﬀect". Costs really did more-or-less double without any
concomitant increase in measurable quality.
So, imagine you're a poor person. White, minority, whatever. Which would you prefer?
Sending your child to a 2016 school? Or sending your child to a 1975 school, and
getting a check for $5,000 every year?
I'm proposing that choice because as far as I can tell that is the stakes here. 2016
schools have whatever tiny test score advantage they have over 1975 schools, and
cost $5000/year more, inﬂation adjusted. That $5000 comes out of the pocket of
somebody - either taxpayers, or other people who could be helped by government
programs.

Second, college is even worse:
Note this is not adjusted for inﬂation; see link below for adjusted ﬁgures
Inﬂation-adjusted cost of a university education was something like $2000/year in
1980. Now it's closer to $20,000/year. No, it's not because of decreased government
funding, and there are similar trajectories for public and private schools.
I don't know if there's an equivalent of "test scores" measuring how well colleges
perform, so just use your best judgment. Do you think that modern colleges provide
$18,000/year greater value than colleges did in your parents' day? Would you rather
graduate from a modern college, or graduate from a college more like the one your
parents went to, plus get a check for $72,000?
(or, more realistically, have $72,000 less in student loans to pay oﬀ)
Was your parents' college even noticeably worse than yours? My parents sometimes
talk about their college experience, and it seems to have had all the relevant features
of a college experience. Clubs. Classes. Professors. Roommates. I might have gotten
something extra for my $72,000, but it's hard to see what it was.
Third, health care. The graph is starting to look disappointingly familiar:
The cost of health care has about quintupled since 1970. It's actually been rising since
earlier than that, but I can't ﬁnd a good graph; it looks like it would have been about
$1200 in today's dollars in 1960, for an increase of about 800% in those ﬁfty years.
This has had the expected eﬀects. The average 1960 worker spent ten days' worth of
their yearly paycheck on health insurance; the average modern worker spends sixty
days' worth of it, a sixth of their entire earnings.
Or not.
This time I can't say with 100% certainty that all this extra spending has been for
nothing. Life expectancy has gone way up since 1960:
Extra bonus conclusion: the Spanish ﬂu was really bad
But a lot of people think that life expectancy depends on other things a lot more than
healthcare spending. Sanitation, nutrition, quitting smoking, plus advances in health
technology that don't involve spending more money. ACE inhibitors (invented in 1975)
are great and probably increased lifespan a lot, but they cost $20 for a year's supply
and replaced older drugs that cost about the same amount.
In terms of calculating how much lifespan gain healthcare spending has produced, we
have a couple of options. Start with by country:

Countries like South Korea and Israel have about the same life expectancy as the US
but pay about 25% of what we do. Some people use this to prove the superiority of
centralized government health systems, although Random Critical Analysis has an
alternative perspective. In any case, it seems very possible to get the same improving
life expectancies as the US without octupling health care spending.
The Netherlands increased their health budget by a lot around 2000, sparking a bunch
of studies on whether that increased life expectancy or not. There's a good meta-
analysis here, which lists six studies trying to calculate how much of the change in life
expectancy was due to the large increases in health spending during this period.
There's a broad range of estimates: 0.3%, 1.8%, 8.0%, 17.2%, 22.1%, 27.5% (I'm
taking their numbers for men; the numbers for women are pretty similar). They also
mention two studies that they did not oﬃcially include; one ﬁnding 0% eﬀect and one
ﬁnding 50% eﬀect (I'm not sure why these studies weren't included). They add:
In none of these studies is the issue of reverse causality addressed; sometimes it
is not even mentioned. This implies that the eﬀect of health care spending on
mortality may be overestimated.
They say:
Based on our review of empirical studies, we conclude that it is likely that
increased health care spending has contributed to the recent increase in life
expectancy in the Netherlands. Applying the estimates form published studies to
the observed increase in health care spending in the Netherlands between 2000
and 2010 [of 40%] would imply that 0.3% to almost 50% of the increase in life
expectancy may have been caused by increasing health care spending. An
important reason for the wide range in such estimates is that they all include
methodological problems highlighted in this paper. However, this wide range
inicates that the counterfactual study by Meerding et al, which argued that 50% of
the increase in life expectancy in the Netherlands since the 1950s can be
attributed to medical care, can probably be interpreted as an upper bound.
It's going to be completely irresponsible to try to apply this to the increase in health
spending in the US over the past 50 years, since this is probably diﬀerent at every
margin and the US is not the Netherlands and the 1950s are not the 2010s. But if we
irresponsibly take their median estimate and apply it to the current question, we get
that increasing health spending in the US has been worth about one extra year of life
expectancy.
This study attempts to directly estimate a %GDP health spending to life expectancy
conversion, and says that an increase of 1% GDP corresponds to an increase of 0.05
years life expectancy. That would suggest a slightly diﬀerent number of 0.65 years life
expectancy gained by healthcare spending since 1960)
If these numbers seem absurdly low, remember all of those controlled experiments
where giving people insurance doesn't seem to make them much healthier in any
meaningful way.
Or instead of slogging through the statistics, we can just ask the same question as
before. Do you think the average poor or middle-class person would rather:
a) Get modern health care
b) Get the same amount of health care as their parents' generation, but with modern
technology like ACE inhibitors, and also earn $8000 extra a year

Fourth, we se similar eﬀects in infrastructure. The ﬁrst New York City subway opened
around 1900. Various sources list lengths from 10 to 20 miles and costs from $30
million to $60 million dollars - I think my sources are capturing it at diﬀerent stages of
construction with diﬀerent numbers of extensions. In any case, it suggests costs of
between $1.5 million to $6 million dollars/mile = $1-4 million per kilometer. That looks
like it's about the inﬂation-adjusted equivalent of $100 million/kilometer today, though
I'm very uncertain about that estimate. In contrast, Vox notes that a new New York
subway line being opened this year costs about $2.2 billion per kilometer, suggesting
a cost increase of twenty times - although I'm very uncertain about this estimate.
Things become clearer when you compare them country-by-country. The same Vox
article notes that Paris, Berlin, and Copenhagen subways cost about $250 million per
kilometer, almost 90% less. Yet even those European subways are overpriced
compared to Korea, where a kilometer of subway in Seoul costs $40 million/km
(another Korean subway project cost $80 million/km). This is a diﬀerence of 50x
between Seoul and New York for apparently comparable services. It suggests that the
1900s New York estimate above may have been roughly accurate if their eﬃciency
was roughly in line with that of modern Europe and Korea.
Fifth, housing (source:
Most of the important commentary on this graph has already been said, but I would
add that optimistic takes like this one by the American Enterprise Institute are missing
some of the dynamic. Yes, homes are bigger than they used to be, but part of that is
zoning laws which make it easier to get big houses than small houses. There are a lot
of people who would prefer to have a smaller house but don't. When I ﬁrst moved to
Michigan, I lived alone in a three bedroom house because there were no good one-
bedroom houses available near my workplace and all of the apartments were loud and
crime-y.
Or, once again, just ask yourself: do you think most poor and middle class people
would rather:
1. Rent a modern house/apartment
2. Rent the sort of house/apartment their parents had, for half the cost
II.
So, to summarize: in the past ﬁfty years, education costs have doubled, college costs
have dectupled, health insurance costs have dectupled, subway costs have at least
dectupled, and housing costs have increased by about ﬁfty percent. US health care
costs about four times as much as equivalent health care in other First World
countries; US subways cost about eight times as much as equivalent subways in other
First World countries.
I worry that people don't appreciate how weird this is. I didn't appreciate it for a long
time. I guess I just ﬁgured that Grandpa used to talk about how back in his day movie
tickets only cost a nickel; that was just the way of the world. But all of the numbers
above are inﬂation-adjusted. These things have dectupled in cost even after you
adjust for movies costing a nickel in Grandpa's day. They have really, genuinely
dectupled in cost, no economic trickery involved.

And this is especially strange because we expect that improving technology and
globalization ought to cut costs. In 1983, the ﬁrst mobile phone cost $4,000 - about
$10,000 in today's dollars. It was also a gigantic piece of crap. Today you can get a
much better phone for $100. This is the right and proper way of the universe. It's why
we fund scientists, and pay businesspeople the big bucks.
But things like college and health care have still had their prices dectuple. Patients
can now schedule their appointments online; doctors can send prescriptions through
the fax, pharmacies can keep track of medication histories on centralized computer
systems that interface with the cloud, nurses get automatic reminders when they're
giving two drugs with a potential interaction, insurance companies accept payment
through credit cards - and all of this costs ten times as much as it did in the days of
punch cards and secretaries who did calculations by hand.
It's actually even worse than this, because we take so many opportunities to save
money that were unavailable in past generations. Underpaid foreign nurses immigrate
to America and work for a song. Doctors' notes are sent to India overnight where
they're transcribed by sweatshop-style labor for pennies an hour. Medical equipment
gets manufactured in goodness-only-knows which obscure Third World country. And it
still costs ten times as much as when this was all made in the USA - and that back
when minimum wages were proportionally higher than today.
And it's actually even worse than this. A lot of these services have decreased in
quality, presumably as an attempt to cut costs even further. Doctors used to make
house calls; even when I was young in the '80s my father would still go to the houses
of diﬃcult patients who were too sick to come to his oﬃce. This study notes that for
women who give birth in the hospital, "the standard length of stay was 8 to 14 days in
the 1950s but declined to less than 2 days in the mid-1990s". The doctors I talk to say
this isn't because modern women are healthier, it's because they kick them out as
soon as it's safe to free up beds for the next person. Historic records of hospital care
generally describe leisurely convalescence periods and making sure somebody felt
absolutely well before letting them go; this seems bizarre to anyone who has
participated in a modern hospital, where the mantra is to kick people out as soon as
they're "stable" ie not in acute crisis.
If we had to provide the same quality of service as we did in 1960, and without the
gains from modern technology and globalization, who even knows how many times
more health care would cost? Fifty times more? A hundred times more?
And the same is true for colleges and houses and subways and so on.
III.
The existing literature on cost disease focuses on the Baumol eﬀect. Suppose in some
underdeveloped economy, people can choose either to work in a factory or join an
orchestra, and the salaries of factory workers and orchestra musicians reﬂect relative
supply and demand and proﬁt in those industries. Then the economy undergoes a
technological revolution, and factories can produce ten times as many goods. Some of
the increased productivity trickles down to factory workers, and they earn more
money. Would-be musicians leave the orchestras behind to go work in the higher-
paying factories, and the orchestras have to raise their prices if they want to be
assured enough musicians. So tech improvements in the factory sectory raise prices in
the orchestra sector.

We could tell a story like this to explain rising costs in education, health care, etc. If
technology increases productivity for skilled laborers in other industries, then less
susceptible industries might end up footing the bill since they have to pay their
workers more.
There's only one problem: health care and education aren't paying their workers
more; in fact, quite the opposite.
Here are teacher salaries over time (source):
Teacher salaries are relatively ﬂat adjusting for inﬂation. But salaries for other jobs are
increasing modestly relative to inﬂation. So teacher salaries relative to other
occupations' salaries are actually declining.
Here's a similar graph for professors (source):
Professor salaries are going up a little, but again, they're probably losing position
relative to the average occupation. Also, note that although the average salary of
each type of faculty is stable or increasing, the average salary of all faculty is going
down. No mystery here - colleges are doing everything they can to switch from
tenured professors to adjuncts, who complain of being overworked and abused while
making about the same amount as a Starbucks barista.
This seems to me a lot like the case of the hospitals cutting care for new mothers. The
price of the service dectuples, yet at the same time the service has to sacriﬁce quality
in order to control costs.
And speaking of hospitals, here's the graph for nurses (source):
Female nurses' salaries went from about $55,000 in 1988 to $63,000 in 2013. This is
probably around the average wage increase during that time. Also, some of this
reﬂects changes in education: in the 1980s only 40% of nurses had a degree; by 2010,
about 80% did.
And for doctors (source)
Stable again! Except that a lot of doctors' salaries now go to paying oﬀ their medical
school debt, which has been ballooning like everything eles.
I don't have a similar graph for subway workers, but come on. The overall pictures is
that health care and education costs have managed to increase by ten times without
a single cent of the gains going to teachers, doctors, or nurses. Indeed these
professions seem to have lost ground salary-wise relative to others.
I also want to add some anecdote to these hard facts. My father is a doctor and my
mother is a teacher, so I got to hear a lot about how these professions have changed

over the past generation. It seems at least a little like the adjunct story, although
without the clearly deﬁned "professor vs. adjunct" dichotomy that makes it so easy to
talk about. Doctors are really, really, really unhappy. When I went to medical school,
some of my professors would tell me outright that they couldn't believe anyone would
still go into medicine with all of the new stresses and demands placed on doctors. This
doesn't seem to be limited to one medical school. Wall Street Journal: Why Doctors
Are Sick Of Their Profession - "American physicians are increasingly unhappy with
their once-vaunted profession, and that malaise is bad for their patients". The Daily
Beast: How Being A Doctor Became The Most Miserable Profession - "Being a doctor
has become a miserable and humiliating undertaking. Indeed, many doctors feel that
America has declared war on physicians". Forbes: Why Are Doctors So Unhappy? -
"Doctors have become like everyone else: insecure, discontent and scared about the
future." Vox: Only Six Percent Of Doctors Are Happy With Their Jobs. Al Jazeera
America: Here's Why Nine Out Of Ten Doctors Wouldn't Recommend Medicine As A
Profession. Read these articles and they all say the same thing that all the doctors I
know say - medicine used to be a well-respected, enjoyable profession where you
could give patients good care and feel self-actualized. Now it kind of sucks.
Meanwhile, I also see articles like this piece from NPR saying teachers are
experiencing historic stress levels and up to 50% say their job "isn't worth it". Teacher
job satisfaction is at historic lows. And the veteran teachers I know say the same thing
as the veteran doctors I know - their jobs used to be enjoyable and make them feel
like they were making a diﬀerence; now they feel overworked, unappreciated, and
trapped in mountains of paperwork.
It might make sense for these ﬁelds to become more expensive if their employees'
salaries were increasing. And it might make sense for salaries to stay the same if
employees instead beneﬁtted from lower workloads and better working conditions.
But neither of these are happening.
IV.
So what's going on? Why are costs increasing so dramatically? Some possible
answers:
First, can we dismiss all of this as an illusion? Maybe adjusting for inﬂation is harder
than I think. Inﬂation is an average, so some things have to have higher-than-average
inﬂation; maybe it's education, health care, etc. Or maybe my sources have the wrong
statistics.
But I don't think this is true. The last time I talked about this problem, someone
mentioned they're running a private school which does just as well as public schools
but costs only $3000/student/year, a fourth of the usual rate. Marginal Revolution
notes that India has a private health system that delivers the same quality of care as
its public system for a quarter of the cost. Whenever the same drug is provided by the
oﬃcial US health system and some kind of grey market supplement sort of thing, the
grey market supplement costs between a ﬁfth and a tenth as much; for example,
Google's ﬁrst hit for Deplin®, oﬃcial prescription L-methylfolate, costs $175 for a
month's supply; unregulated L-methylfolate supplement delivers the same dose for
about $30. And this isn't even mentioning things like the $1 bag of saline that costs
$700 at hospitals. Since it seems like it's not too hard to do things for a fraction of
what we currently do things for, probably we should be less reluctant to believe that
the cost of everything is really inﬂated.

Second, might markets just not work? I know this is kind of an extreme question to ask
in a post on economics, but maybe nobody knows what they're doing in a lot of these
ﬁelds and people can just increase costs and not suﬀer any decreased demand
because of it. Suppose that people proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that Khan
Academy could teach you just as much as a normal college education, but for free.
People would still ask questions like - will employers accept my Khan Academy
degree? Will it look good on a resume? Will people make fun of me for it? The same is
true of community colleges, second-tier colleges, for-proﬁt colleges, et cetera. I got
oﬀered a free scholarship to a mediocre state college, and I turned it down on the
grounds that I knew nothing about anything and maybe years from now I would be
locked out of some sort of Exciting Opportunity because my college wasn't prestigious
enough. Assuming everyone thinks like this, can colleges just charge whatever they
want?
Likewise, my workplace oﬀered me three diﬀerent health insurance plans, and I chose
the middle-expensiveness one, on the grounds that I had no idea how health
insurance worked but maybe if I bought the cheap one I'd get sick and regret my
choice, and maybe if I bought the expensive one I wouldn't be sick and regret my
choice. I am a doctor, my employer is a hospital, and the health insurance was for
treatment in my own health system. The moral of the story is that I am an idiot. The
second moral of the story is that people probably are not super-informed health care
consumers.
This can't be pure price-gouging, since corporate proﬁts haven't increased nearly
enough to be where all the money is going. But a while ago a commenter linked me to
the Delta Cost Project, which scrutinizes the exact causes of increasing college tuition.
Some of it is the administrative bloat that you would expect. But a lot of it is fun
"student life" types of activities like clubs, festivals, and paying Milo Yiannopoulos to
speak and then cleaning up after the ensuing riots. These sorts of things improve the
student experience, but I'm not sure that the average student would rather go to an
expensive college with clubs/festivals/Milo than a cheap college without them. More
important, it doesn't really seem like the average student is oﬀered this choice.
This kind of suggests a picture where colleges expect people will pay whatever price
they set, so they set a very high price and then use the money for cool things and
increasing their own prestige. Or maybe clubs/festivals/Milo become such a signal of
prestige that students avoid colleges that don't comply since they worry their degrees
won't be respected? Some people have pointed out that hospitals have switched from
many-people-all-in-a-big-ward to private rooms. Once again, nobody seems to have
been oﬀered the choice between expensive hospitals with private rooms versus cheap
hospitals with roommates. It's almost as if industries have their own reasons for
switching to more-bells-and-whistles services that people don't necessarily want, and
consumers just go along with it because for some reason they're not exercising choice
the same as they would in other markets.
(this article on the Oklahoma City Surgery Center might be about a partial corrective
for this kind of thing)
Third, can we attribute this to the ineﬃciency of government relative to private
industry? I don't think so. The government handles most primary education and
subways, and has its hand in health care. But we know that for-proﬁt hospitals aren't
much cheaper than government hospitals, and that private schools usually aren't
much cheaper (and are sometimes more expensive) than government schools. And
private colleges cost more than government-funded ones.

Fourth, can we attribute it to indirect government intervention through regulation,
which public and private companies alike must deal with? This seems to be at least
part of the story in health care, given how much money you can save by grey-market
practices that avoid the FDA. It's harder to apply it to colleges, though some people
have pointed out regulations like Title IX that aﬀect the educational sector.
One factor that seems to speak out against this is that starting with Reagan in 1980,
and picking up steam with Gingrich in 1994, we got an increasing presence of
Republicans in government who declared war on overregulation - but the cost disease
proceeded unabated. This is suspicious, but in fairness to the Republicans, they did
sort of fail miserably at deregulating things. "The literal number of pages in the
regulatory code" is kind of a blunt instrument, but it doesn't exactly inspire conﬁdence
in the Republicans' deregulation eﬀorts:
Here's a more interesting (and more fun) argument against regulations being to
blame: what about pet health care? Veterinary care is much less regulated than
human health care, yet its cost is rising as fast (or faster) than that of the human
medical system (popular article, study). I'm not sure what to make of this.
Fifth, might the increased regulatory complexity happen not through literal
regulations, but through fear of lawsuits? That is, might institutions add extra layers of
administration and expense not because they're forced to, but because they fear
being sued if they don't and then something goes wrong?
I see this all the time in medicine. A patient goes to the hospital with a heart attack.
While he's recovering, he tells his doctor that he's really upset about all of this. Any
normal person would say "You had a heart attack, of course you're upset, get over it."
But if his doctor says this, and then a year later he commits suicide for some
unrelated reason, his family can sue the doctor for "not picking up the warning signs"
and win several million dollars. So now the doctor consults a psychiatrist, who does an
hour-long evaluation, charges the insurance company $500, and determines using her
immense clinical expertise that the patient is upset because he just had a heart
attack.
Those outside the ﬁeld have no idea how much of medicine is built on this principle.
People often say that the importance of lawsuits to medical cost increases is overrated
because malpractice insurance doesn't cost that much, but the situation above would
never look lawsuit-related; the whole thing only works because everyone involved
documents it as well-justiﬁed psychiatric consult to investigate depression. Apparently
some studies suggest this isn't happening, but all they do is survey doctors, and with
all due respect all the doctors I know say the opposite.
This has nothing to do with government regulations (except insofar as these make
lawsuits easier or harder), but it sure can drive cost increases, and it might apply to
ﬁelds outside medicine as well.
Sixth, might we have changed our level of risk tolerance? That is, might increased
caution be due not purely to lawsuitphobia, but to really caring more about whether or
not people are protected? I read stuﬀ every so often about how playgrounds are
becoming obsolete because nobody wants to let kids run around unsupervised on
something with sharp edges. Suppose that one in 10,000 kids get a horrible
playground-related injury. Is it worth making playgrounds cost twice as much and be
half as fun in order to decrease that number to one in 100,000? This isn't a rhetorical

question; I think diﬀerent people can have legitimately diﬀerent opinions here (though
there are probably some utilitarian things we can do to improve them).
To bring back the lawsuit point, some of this probably relates to a diﬀerence between
personal versus institutional risk tolerance. Every so often, an elderly person getting
up to walk to the bathroom will fall and break their hip. This is a fact of life, and
elderly people deal with it every day. Most elderly people I know don't spend
thousands of dollars fall-prooﬁng the route from their bed to their bathroom, or hiring
people to watch them at every moment to make sure they don't fall, or buy a bedside
commode to make bathroom-related falls impossible. This suggests a revealed
preference that elderly people are willing to tolerate a certain fall probability in order
to save money and convenience. Hospitals, which face huge lawsuits if any elderly
person falls on the premises, are not willing to tolerate that probability. They put rails
on elderly people's beds, place alarms on them that will go oﬀ if the elderly person
tries to leave the bed without permission, and hire patient care assistants who among
other things go around carefully holding elderly people upright as they walk to the
bathroom (I assume this job will soon require at least a master's degree). As more
things become institutionalized and the level of acceptable institutional risk tolerance
becomes lower, this could shift the cost-risk tradeoﬀ even if there isn't a population-
level trend towards more risk-aversion.
Seventh, might things cost more for the people who pay because so many people
don't pay? This is somewhat true of colleges, where an increasing number of people
are getting in on scholarships funded by the tuition of non-scholarship students. I
haven't been able to ﬁnd great statistics on this, but one argument against: couldn't a
college just not fund scholarships, and oﬀer much lower prices to its paying students?
I get that scholarships are good and altruistic, but it would be surprising if every single
college thought of its role as an altruistic institution, and cared about it more than
they cared about providing the same service at a better price. I guess this is related to
my confusion about why more people don't open up colleges. Maybe this is the "smart
people are rightly too scared and confused to go to for-proﬁt colleges, and there's not
enough ability to discriminate between the good and the bad ones to make it
worthwhile to found a good one" thing again.
This also applies in health care. Our hospital (and every other hospital in the country)
has some "frequent ﬂier" patients who overdose on meth at least once a week. They
comes in, get treated for their meth overdose (we can't legally turn away emergency
cases), get advised to get help for their meth addiction (without the slightest
expectation that they will take our advice) and then get discharged. Most of them are
poor and have no insurance, but each admission costs a couple of thousand dollars.
The cost gets paid by a combination of taxpayers and other hospital patients with
good insurance who get big markups on their own bills.
Eighth, might total compensation be increasing even though wages aren't? There
deﬁnitely seems to be a pensions crisis, especially in a lot of government work, and
it's possible that some of this is going to pay the pensions of teachers, etc. My
understanding is that in general pensions aren't really increasing much faster than
wages, but this might not be true in those speciﬁc industries. Also, this might pass the
buck to the question of why we need to spend more on pensions now than in the past.
I don't think increasing life expectancy explains all of this, but I might be wrong.
IV.

I mentioned politics brieﬂy above, but they probably deserve more space here.
Libertarian-minded people keep talking about how there's too much red tape and the
economy is being throttled. And less libertarian-minded people keep interpreting it as
not caring about the poor, or not understanding that government has an important
role in a civilized society, or as a "dog whistle" for racism, or whatever. I don't know
why more people don't just come out and say "LOOK, REALLY OUR MAIN PROBLEM IS
THAT ALL THE MOST IMPORTANT THINGS COST TEN TIMES AS MUCH AS THEY USED TO
FOR NO REASON, PLUS THEY SEEM TO BE GOING DOWN IN QUALITY, AND NOBODY
KNOWS WHY, AND WE'RE MOSTLY JUST DESPERATELY FLAILING AROUND LOOKING
FOR SOLUTIONS HERE." State that clearly, and a lot of political debates take on a
diﬀerent light.
For example: some people promote free universal college education, remembering a
time when it was easy for middle class people to aﬀord college if they wanted it. Other
people oppose the policy, remembering a time when people didn't depend on
government handouts. Both are true! My uncle paid for his tuition at a really good
college just by working a pretty easy summer job - not so hard when college cost a
tenth of what it did now. The modern conﬂict between opponents and proponents of
free college education is over how to distribute our losses. In the old days, we could
combine low taxes with widely available education. Now we can't, and we have to
argue about which value to sacriﬁce.
Or: some people get upset about teachers' unions, saying they must be sucking the
"dynamism" out of education because of increasing costs. Others people ﬁercely
defend them, saying teachers are underpaid and overworked. Once again, in the
context of cost disease, both are obviously true. The taxpayers are just trying to
protect their right to get education as cheaply as they used to. The teachers are trying
to protect their right to make as much money as they used to. The conﬂict between
the taxpayers and the teachers' unions is about how to distribute losses; somebody is
going to have to be worse oﬀ than they were a generation ago, so who should it be?
And the same is true to greater or lesser degrees in the various debates over health
care, public housing, et cetera.
Imagine if tomorrow, the price of water dectupled. Suddenly people have to choose
between drinking and washing dishes. Activists argue that taking a shower is a basic
human right, and grumpy talk show hosts point out that in their day, parents taught
their children not to waste water. A coalition promotes laws ensuring government-
subsidized free water for poor families; a Fox News investigative report shows that
some people receiving water on the government dime are taking long luxurious
showers. Everyone gets really angry and there's lots of talk about basic compassion
and personal responsibility and whatever but all of this is secondary to why does
water costs ten times what it used to?
I think this is the basic intuition behind so many people, even those who genuinely
want to help the poor, are afraid of "tax and spend" policies. In the context of cost
disease, these look like industries constantly doubling, tripling, or dectupling their
price, and the government saying "Okay, ﬁne," and increasing taxes however much it
costs to pay for whatever they're demanding now.
If we give everyone free college education, that solves a big social problem. It also
locks in a price which is ten times too high for no reason. This isn't fair to the
government, which has to pay ten times more than it should. It's not fair to the poor
people, who have to face the stigma of accepting handouts for something they could

easily have aﬀorded themselves if it was at its proper price. And it's not fair to future
generations if colleges take this opportunity to increase the cost by twenty times, and
then our children have to subsidize that.
I'm not sure how many people currently opposed to paying for free health care, or free
college, or whatever, would be happy to pay for health care that cost less, that was
less wasteful and more eﬃcient, and whose price we expected to go down rather than
up with every passing year. I expect it would be a lot.
And if it isn't, who cares? The people who want to help the poor have enough political
capital to spend eg $500 billion on Medicaid; if that were to go ten times further, then
everyone could get the health care they need without any more political action
needed. If some government program found a way to give poor people good health
insurance for a few hundred dollars a year, college tuition for about a thousand, and
housing for only two-thirds what it costs now, that would be the greatest anti-poverty
advance in history. That program is called "having things be as eﬃcient as they were
a few decades ago".
V.
In 1930, economist John Maynard Keynes predicted that his grandchildrens'
generation would have a 15 hour work week. At the time, it made sense. GDP was
rising so quickly that anyone who could draw a line on a graph could tell that our
generation would be four or ﬁve times richer than his. And the average middle-class
person in his generation felt like they were doing pretty well and had most of what
they needed. Why wouldn't they decide to take some time oﬀ and settle for a lifestyle
merely twice as luxurious as Keynes' own?
Keynes was sort of right. GDP per capita is 4-5x greater today than in his time. Yet we
still work forty hour weeks, and some large-but-inconsistently-reported percent of
Americans (76? 55? 47?) still live paycheck to paycheck.
And yes, part of this is because inequality is increasing and most of the gains are
going to the rich. But this alone wouldn't be a disaster; we'd get to Keynes' utopia a
little slower than we might otherwise, but eventually we'd get there. Most gains going
to the rich means at least some gains are going to the poor. And at least there's a lot
of mainstream awareness of the problem.
I'm more worried about the part where the cost of basic human needs goes up faster
than wages do. Even if you're making twice as much money, if your health care and
education and so on cost ten times as much, you're going to start falling behind. Right
now the standard of living isn't just stagnant, it's at risk of declining, and a lot of that
is student loans and health insurance costs and so on.
What's happening? I don't know and I ﬁnd it really scary.

Highlights From The Comments On Cost
Disease
I got many good responses to my Considerations On Cost Disease post, both in the
comments and elsewhere. A lot of people thought the explanation was obvious;
unfortunately, they all disagreed on what the obvious explanation was. Below are some
of the responses I found most interesting.
John Cochrane:
So, what is really happening? I think Scott nearly gets there. Things cost 10 times as
much, 10 times more than they used to and 10 times more than in other countries.
It's not going to wages. It's not going to proﬁts. So where is it going?
The unavoidable answer: The number of people it takes to produce these goods is
skyrocketing. Labor productivity — number of people per quality adjusted output —
declined by a factor of 10 in these areas. It pretty much has to be that: if the money
is not going to proﬁts, to to each employee, it must be going to the number of
employees.
How can that happen? Our machines are better than ever, as Scott points out. Well,
we (and especially we economists) pay too much attention to snazzy gadgets.
Productivity depends on organizations not just on gadgets. Southwest ﬁgured out
how to turn an airplane around in 20 minutes, and it still takes United an hour.
Contrariwise, I think we know where the extra people are. The ratio of teachers to
students hasn't gone down a lot — but the ratio of administrators to students has
shot up. Most large public school systems spend more than half their budget on
administrators. Similarly, class sizes at most colleges and universities haven't
changed that much — but administrative staﬀ have exploded. There are 2.5 people
handling insurance claims for every doctor. Construction sites have always had a lot
of people standing around for every one actually working the machine. But now for
every person operating the machine there is an army of planners, regulators,
lawyers, administrative staﬀ, consultants and so on. (I welcome pointers to good
graphs and numbers on this sort of thing.)
So, my bottom line: administrative bloat.
Well, how does bloat come about? Regulations and law are, as Scott mentions, part of
the problem. These are all areas either run by the government or with large
government involvement. But the real key is, I think lack of competition. These are
above all areas with not much competition. In turn, however, they are not by a long
shot "natural monopolies" or failure of some free market. The main eﬀect of our
regulatory and legal system is not so much to directly raise costs, as it is to lessen
competition (that is often its purpose). The lack of competition leads to the cost
disease.
Though textbooks teach that monopoly leads to proﬁts, it doesn't "The best of all
monopoly proﬁts is a quiet life" said Hicks. Everywhere we see businesses protected
from competition, especially highly regulated businesses, we see the cost disease
spreading. And it spreads largely by forcing companies to hire loads of useless
people.

Yes, technical regress can happen. Productivity depends as much on the functioning
of large organizations, and the overall legal and regulatory system in which they
operate, as it does on gadgets. We can indeed "forget" how those work. Like our
ancestors peer at the buildings, aqueducts, dams, roads, and bridges put up by our
ancestors, whether Roman or American, and wonder just how they did it.
David Manheim:
I think there is another dynamic that's being ignored — and I would be surprised if an
economist ignored it, but I'll blame Scott's eclectic ad-hoc education for why he
doesn't discuss the elephant in the room — Superior goods.
For those who don't remember their Economics classes, imagine a guy who makes
$40,000/year and eats chicken for dinner 3 nights a week. He gets a huge 50% raise,
to $60,000/year, and suddenly has extra money to spend — his disposable income
probably tripled or quadrupled. Before the hedonic treadmill kicks in, and he decides
to waste all the money on higher rent and nicer cars, he changes his diet. But he
won't start eating chicken 10 times a week — he'll start eating steak. When people
get more money, they replace cheap "inferior" goods with expensive "superior"
goods. And steak is a superior good.
But how many times a week will people eat steak? Two? Five? Americans as a whole
got really rich in the 1940s and 1950s, and needed someplace to start spending their
newfound wealth. What do people spend extra money on? Entertainment is now
pretty cheap, and there are only so many nights a week you see a movie, and only so
many $20/month MMORPGs you're going to pay for. You aren't going to pay 5 times
as much for a slightly better video game or movie — and although you might pay
double for 3D-Imax, there's not much room for growth in that 5%.
The Atlantic had a piece on this several years ago, with the following chart:
Food, including rising steak consumption, decreased to a negligible part of people's
budgets, as housing started rising.In this chart, the reason healthcare hasn't really

shot up to the extent Scott discussed, as the article notes, is because most of the
cost is via pre-tax employer spending. The other big change the article discusses is
that after 1950 or so, everyone got cars, and commuted from their more expensive
suburban houses — which is eﬀectively an implicit increase in housing cost.
And at some point, bigger houses and nicer cars begin to saturate; a Tesla is nicer
than my Hyundai, and I'd love one, but not enough to upgrade for 3x the cost. I know
how much better a Tesla is — I've seen them.
Limitless Demand, Invisible Supply
There are only a few things that we have a limitless demand for, but very limited
ability to judge the impact of our spending. What are they?
I think this is one big missing piece of the puzzle; in both healthcare and education,
we want improvements, and they are worth a ton, but we can't ﬁgure out how much
the marginal spending improves things. So we pour money into these sectors.
Scott thinks this means that teachers' and doctors' wages should rise, but they don't.
I think it's obvious why; they supply isn't very limited. And the marginal impact of
two teachers versus one, or a team of doctors versus one, isn't huge. (Class size
matters, but we have tons of teachers — with no shortage in sight, there is no price
pressure.)
What sucks up the increased money? Dollars, both public and private, chasing hard
to ﬁnd beneﬁts.
I'd spend money to improve my health, both mental and physical, but how? Extra
medical diagnostics to catch problems, pricier but marginally more eﬀective drugs,
chiropractors, probably useless supplements — all are exploding in popularity. How
much do they improve health? I don't really know — not much, but I'd probably try
something if it might be useful.
I'm spending a ton of money on preschool for my kids. Why? Because it helps,
according to the studies. How much better is the $15,000/year daycare versus the
$8,000 a year program a friend of mine runs in her house? Unclear, but I'm certainly
not the only one spending big bucks. Why spend less, if education is the most
superior good around?
How much better is Harvard than a subsidized in-state school, or four years of that
school versus 2 years of cheap community college before transferring in? The studies
seem to suggest that most of the beneﬁt is really because the kids who get into the
better schools. And Scott knows that this is happening.
We pour money into schools and medicine in order to improve things, but where does
the money go? Into eﬀorts to improve things, of course. But I've argued at length
before that bureaucracy is bad at incentivizing things, especially when goals are
unclear. So the money goes to sinkholes like more bureaucrats and clever
manipulation of the metrics that are used to allocate the money.
As long as we're incentivized to improve things that we're unsure how to improve,
the incentives to pour money into them unwisely will continue, and costs will rise.
That's not the entire answer, but it's a central dynamic that leads to many of the
things Scott is talking about — so hopefully that reduces Scott's fears a bit.
A reader who wishes to remain anonymous emails me, saying:

In the business I know - hedge funds - I am aware of tiny operators running perfectly
functional one-person shops on a shoestring, who take advantage of workarounds for
legal and regulatory costs (like http://www.riainabox.com/). Then there are folks like
me who are trying to "be legit" and hope to attract the big money from pensions and
big banks. Those folks' decisions are all made across major principal/agent divides
where agents are incentivized not to take risks. So, they force hedge funds into an
arms race of insanely paranoid "best practices" to compete for their money. So... my
set up costs (which so far seem to have been too little rather than too much) were
more than 10x what they could have been.
I guess this supports the "institutional risk tolerance" angle. There must be similar
massive unseen frictions probably in many industries that go into "checking boxes".
Relatedly, a pet theory of mine is that "organizational complexity" imposes enormous
and not fully appreciated costs, which probably grow quadratically with organization
size. I'd predict, without Googling, that the the US military, just as a function of being
so large, has >75% of its personal doing eﬀectively administrative/logistical things,
and that you could probably ﬁnd funny examples of organizational-overhead-
proliferation like an HR department so big it needed its own (meta-)HR department.
Noah Smith:
That could be one force behind rising costs; it deﬁnitely seems important for K-12
education. But it doesn't explain why the U.S. is so much worse than countries such
as France, Germany or Japan. Those countries are about as productive as the U.S., so
their cost disease should be comparable. Something else must be afoot.
Another usual suspect is government intervention. The government subsidizes
college through cheap loans, purchases infrastructure, restricts housing supply, and
intervenes heavily in the health-care market. It's probably part of the problem in
these areas, especially in urban housing markets.
But again, government intervention struggles to explain the diﬀerence between the
U.S. and other rich nations. In most countries, health care is mainly paid for by the
government — many countries have nationalized the industry outright. Yet their
health outcomes are broadly similar to those in the U.S., or even a little bit better.
Other countries have strong unions and high land acquisition costs — often stronger
and higher than the U.S. — but their infrastructure is much cheaper. And there is no
law or regulation propping up high wealth-management fees or real-estate
commissions. In general, lower-cost places like Japan and Europe have more
regulation and more interventionism than the U.S.
So if cost disease and government can at most be only part of the story, what's going
on? One possibility Alexander raises is that "markets might just not work." In other
words, there might be large market failures going on.
The health-care market naturally has a lot of adverse selection — people with poor
health are more inclined to buy insurance. That means insurance companies,
knowing its customers tend to be those with poorer health, charge higher prices.
Also, hospitals could be local monopolies. And college education could be costly in
part because of asymmetric information — if Americans tend to vary more than
people in other countries with respect to work ethnic and natural ability, they might
have to spend more on college to prove themselves. This is known as signaling.
When high costs are due to market failures, interventionist government can be the
solution instead of the problem — provided the intervention is done right. So the

more active governments of countries like Europe and Japan might be successfully
holding down costs that would otherwise balloon to ineﬃcient levels.
But there's one more possibility — one that gets taught in few economics classes.
There is almost certainly some level of pure trickery in the economy — people paying
more than they should, because they don't have the time or knowledge to look for
better prices, or because they trust people they shouldn't trust.
This is the thesis of the book "Phishing for Phools," by Nobel-winning economists
George Akerlof and Robert Shiller. The authors advance the disturbing thesis that
sellers will continually look for ways to dupe customers into paying more than they
should, and that these eﬀorts will always be partially successful. In Akerlof and
Shiller's reckoning, markets don't just sometimes fail — they are inherently subject to
both deceit and mistakes.
That could explain a number of unsettling empirical results in the economics
literature. For example, transparency reduces prices substantially in health-care
equipment markets. More complex and opaque mortgage-backed securities failed at
higher rates in the ﬁnancial crisis. In these and other cases, buyers paid too much
because they didn't know what they were buying. Whether that's due to trickery, or
to the diﬃculty of gathering accurate information, it's not good — in an eﬃcient
economy, everyone will know what they're buying.
So it's possible that many of those anomalously high U.S. costs are due to the natural
informational problems of markets.
Megan McArdle:
It's pretty easy to tell a libertarian story where markets work ﬁne, but government
intrusions into these markets have rendered them so unfree that they no longer
function the way they're supposed to. And I think that is at least part of the story
here. Yes, these things are often procured from private parties. But everywhere you
look you see the government: blocking new entry (through accreditation standards,
"certiﬁcate of need" laws, and zoning and building codes), while simultaneously
subsidizing the purchases through artiﬁcially cheap loans and often, direct price
subsidies. It would be sort of shocking if restricted supply combined with stimulated
demand didn't produce rapidly rising prices. Meanwhile, in areas that the
government largely leaves alone (such as Lasik), we pretty much see what you'd
expect: falling prices and improving consumer service.
But that's perhaps a little simplistic. Agriculture is also the focus of a great deal of
government intervention, as are sundry things such as air travel, and we don't see
the same phenomenon there. So we need to dig a little deeper and describe what's
special about these three sectors (we'll leave public transportation out of it, because
there, the answer is pretty much "union featherbedding combined with increasingly
dysfunctional procurement and regulatory processes").
First, and most obviously, they involve vital purchases made on long time horizons,
and with considerable uncertainty. Food is more vital than health care to our well-
being, but its price and quality are really easy to assess: if you buy a piece of fruit,
you know pretty quickly whether you liked it or not. This is a robust market, and it's
going to take communist-level intervention to fundamentally mess it up so that food
is both scarce and not very good.
Homes, schooling and health care, on the other hand, are more complicated
products. You don't know when you buy them how much value they will be to you,

and it is often diﬃcult for a lay person to assess the quality of the product. You can
read hospital rankings and pay a home inspector, but these things only go so far.
The fact that these are expensive purchases that can go terribly wrong creates a
great deal of pressure for the government to intervene. As ours has, over and over, in
all sorts of ways.
And at the risk of giving up a little bit of my libertarian cred, I'll say that government
intervention in these markets did not have to be as expensive-making as it has
turned out to be in America. Other countries have these sorts of problems too, but
they're nowhere near as large as ours.
Part of that is just that we're richer than most of those other countries. We were
going to spend the portion of our budgets no longer needed for food somewhere, and
health care, education and housing are pretty good candidates. But that's only part
of the story. A big part of the story is that America just isn't very good at regulation.
When you talk to people who live elsewhere about what their government does, one
thing that really strikes you about those conversations is how much more competent
other rich industrial governments seem to be at regulating things and delivering
services. Their bureaucracies are not perfect, but they are better than ours.
That's not to say that America could have an awesome big government. Our
regulatory state has been incompetent compared to others for decades, since long
before the Reagan Revolution that Democrats like to blame. There are many, many
factors in this, from our immigration history (vital to understanding how modern
urban bureaucracies work in this country), to the fact that we have many competing
centers of power instead of a single uniﬁed government providing over a single
bureaucratic hierarchy. There is no way to ﬁx this on a national level, and even at the
level of local bureaucratic reform, it's darned near impossible.
In other words, this is probably what we're stuck with. It may not be Baumol's cost
disease — but it's potentially even more serious, and it's going to be a lingering
condition.
Scott Sumner:
I certainly don't claim to have all the answers, but I do feel that much of the problem
reﬂects the fact that governments often cover the cost of services in those three
areas. This leads producers to spend more than the socially optimal amount on these
products. I'm going to provide some examples, but before doing so recall that
economic theory predicts that costs in those areas should be wildly excessive. If the
government paid 90% of the cost of any car you bought, and that didn't lead to lots
more people buying Porsches and Ferraris, then we'd have a major puzzle on our
hands.
Scott mentions that private for-proﬁt hospitals are also quite expensive. But even
there, costs are largely paid for by the government. Close to half of all health care
spending is directly paid for by the government (Medicare, Medicaid, Veterans,
government employees, etc.) and a large share of the rest is indirectly paid for by
taxpayers because health insurance is not just income tax free, but also payroll tax
free. I'd be stunned if health care spending had not soared in recent decades.
A sizable share of my health care spending has been unneeded, and I'm fairly
healthy. I met one person in their 80s who had a normal cold and went to see the
doctor. They said it was probably just a normal cold, but let's put you in the hospital
overnight and do some tests, just in case. There was nothing wrong, and the bill the

next day was something in the $5000 to $10,000 range, I forget the exact amount.
This must happen all the time. No way would they have opted for those services if
Medicare weren't picking up the tab.
Just to be clear, I don't think any monocausal explanation is enough. Governments
also pay for health care in other countries, and the costs are far lower. It's likely the
interaction of the US government picking up much of the tab, plus insurance
regulations, plus American-style litigation, plus powerful provider lobbies that
prevent European-style cost controls, etc., etc., lead to our unusually high cost
structure. So don't take this as a screed against "socialized medicine." I'm making a
narrower point, that a country where the government picks up most of the costs, and
doesn't have eﬀective regulations to hold down spending, is likely to end up with
very expensive medicine.
To be fair, there is evidence from veterinary medicine that demand for pet care has
also soared, and that suggests people are becoming more risk averse, even for their
pets. But there is also evidence cutting the other way. Plastic surgery has not seen
costs skyrocket. (Both are medical ﬁelds where people tend to pay out of pocket.)
I started working at Bentley in 1982, teaching 4 courses a semester. When I retired in
2015, I was making 7 times as much in nominal terms (nearly 3 times as much in real
terms), and I was teaching 2 courses per semester. Thus I was being paid 14 times
more per class (nearly 6 times as much in real terms). No wonder higher education
costs have soared! (Even salaries for new hires have risen sharply in real terms.)
Interestingly, the size of the student body at Bentley didn't change noticeably over
that period (about 4000 undergrads.) But the physical size of the school rose
dramatically, with many new buildings full of much fancier equipment. Right now
they are building a new hockey arena. There are more non-teaching employees. You
can debate whether living standards for Americans have risen over time, but there's
no doubt that living standards for Americans age 18-22 have risen over time—by a
lot.
As far as elementary school, my daughter had 2, 3, and once even 4 teachers in her
classroom, with about 18 students. We had one teacher for 30 students when I was
young. (I'm told classes are even bigger in Japan, and they don't have janitors in
their schools. The students must mop the ﬂoors. I love Japan!)
There are also lots more rules and regulations. By the end of my career, I felt almost
like I was spending as much time teaching 2 classes as I used to spend teaching 4.
Many of these rules were well intentioned, but in the end I really don't think they led
to students learning any more than back in 1982. I wonder if Dodd/Frank is now
making small town banking a frustrating profession in the way that earlier regs made
medicine and teaching increasing frustrating professions.
People say this is a disease of the service sector. But I don't see skyrocketing prices
in restaurants, dry clearers, barbers and lots of other service industries where people
pay out of pocket.
The same is true of construction. Scott estimates that NYC subways cost 20 times as
much as in 1900, even adjusting for inﬂation. The real cost of other types of
construction (such as new homes), has risen far less. Again, people pay for homes
out of pocket, but government pays for subways. Do I even need to mention the cost
of weapons system like the F-35?
To summarize, the case of pet medicine shows that costs can rise rapidly even when
people pay out of pocket. But the biggest and most important examples of cost

inﬂation are in precisely those industries where government picks up a major part of
the tab-health, education, and government procurement of complex products. And
excessive cost inﬂation is exactly what economic theory predicts will happen when
governments heavily subsidize an activity, without adequate cost regulations. Just as
excessive risk taking is exactly what economic theory predicts will happen if
government insures bank deposits, without adequate risk regulations. Let's not be
surprised if the things that happen, are exactly what the textbooks predict would
happen. Even FDR predicted that deposit insurance would lead to reckless behavior
by banks, and he (reluctantly) signed the bill into law.
Sohois:
I've seen some evidence that corporations can be equally vulnerable to cost disease
as public institutions.
For example, since the 1980s CEO pay has quintupled despite the lack of any growth
in proﬁts or otherwise to justify this. Now this is probably going to result in far smaller
eﬀects on overall cost, but it still stands as a demonstration of how market failure
can occur and result in large cost increases in these ﬁrms.
I would venture that many ﬁrms have seen huge increases in both revenues and
costs so that when you adjust proﬁt for inﬂation it hasn't really changed at all, on
average.
Andrew Swift
What you observe is ﬁfty years of optimization of wealth extraction. Price outcomes
depend on the contributions of hundreds of participants. Every participant optimizes
his/her earnings, exerting a constant upward pressure on price. Participants become
ever more expert at getting rich. Wealth-extraction schemes (scams) are reﬁned and
optimized (in all markets), and price increases are pushed downstream (in markets
where buyers can't push back). Radical price increases reﬂect markets where
consumers have reduced ability to push back:
- complex markets (can't understand)
- opaque markets (can't see)
- entrenched/highly-regulated markets (can't modify)
- necessary-to-keep-living markets (can't avoid)
- limited-quantity markets (really want)
- intermediated markets where the end buyer doesn't decide how things are
purchased (don't choose)
Some systems are resistant to contributors' eﬀorts to extract wealth and some
systems are not. There's an equilibrium between cost and readiness to pay. To reduce
the costs in expensive domains, willingness to pay the high costs has to be reduced.
As long as the buyer won't or can't say no, costs will increase through the entire
production process. There won't necessarily be one big obvious rip-oﬀ, but every
participant will optimize the heck out of his contribution and the overall pressure will
push costs up.
Could one provide a cheaper alternative in these domains? Sure for a little while, but
if the bottom line is that people are willing to pay more for the service the prices will
creep back up.
The only exception would be where the new, lower-priced, alternative sets a new
standard and buyers refuse to continue paying the old prices. See

https://stratechery.com/2016/dollar-shave-club-and-the-disruption-of-everything/ for a
great article about this.
Habu71:
My favorite example of ridiculous order-of-magnitude type cost increases is nuclear
power plant construction costs. The plots from this paper illustrate it nicely.
https://www.researchgate.net/ﬁgure/292964046_ﬁg6_Overnight-Construction-Cost-
and-Construction-Duration-of-US-Nuclear-Reactors-Color
Except, in the case of power plant costs, the causes - at least, for the increasing US
costs - are quite a bit more apparent. Pre TMI, US costs were in line with the rest of
the world's cost. Post TMI, not so much. New regulatory burdens all by themselves
increased the cost of new plants by a factor of ten. Now, this is of course not proof
that any of the other problems that Scott mentioned are entirely - or even mostly -
caused by increasing regulatory burdens. It does however, show that government
institutions as awful as the NRC do exist, and that their eﬀects can raise costs by the
amounts seen health care, education, etc..."
John Schilling:
[Fear of lawsuits] is well understood as the cause of the substantial rise in light
airplane prices since 1970. A single-engine, four-seat Cessna 172 cost an inﬂation-
adjusted $77,000 in 1970. A substantially identical airplane cost $163,000 in 1986.
And went out of production the next year, because people weren't willing to pay that
price. When congress passed laws relaxing the manufacturer's liability for older
airplanes, Cessna was able to reinstate production in 1996 at an inﬂation-adjusted
$190,000. Today, the price seems to literally be "if you have to ask, you can't aﬀord
it"; the manufacturer only advertises ﬂeet sales, but I'd estimate about $400,000 (of
which ~$100K is fancy electronics that didn't exist in 1986 and weren't standard in
1996).
In this case it is particularly easy to pull out the lawsuit/liability eﬀect because there
aren't many cofounders. The 1986 Cessna is so little changed from the 1970 model
that they sell at about the same price on the used market when controlled for
condition and total ﬂight time. And fear of lawsuits didn't manifest as safety
enhancements of inscrutable cost and value, because light airplane crashes are
almost always due to Stupid Pilot Tricks and almost everything that a manufacturer
could do to mitigate that (e.g. tricycle landing gear) was standard in 1970. But the
manufacturers still get sued, and have to pay millions, so there's nothing to be done
but pay for liability insurance. And, second-order eﬀect, cut production when your
customers start balking at the increased prices, so you have to amortize the ﬁxed
costs of actually building airplanes over a smaller sales volume.
So, a doubling in price over ﬁfteen or so years, a quadrupling over ﬁfty years in spite
of Congress noticing the problem and trying to mitigate it, attributable to
safety/liability concerns but not resulting in actual safety improvements. I have no
trouble believing something similar is happening in other industries but is harder to
discern because too many other things are happening at the same time.
Alex Zavoluk
Wikipedia suggests that almost all of those other countries have litigation rules that
make weak civil cases more costly, which seems like evidence in favor of the
litigation hypothesis. It also means that there's a relatively straightforward solution.

Doug on Marginal Revolution, in response to a lot of people asking whether maybe we
were just calculating the CPI wrong:
That's a plausible hypothesis, but viewed through that frame of reference, median
wages have also gone down tremendously. It's still the case that the median person
spends at least six times more of their paycheck on healthcare. If healthcare is a
closer metric to "true prices" then manufactured good, then that means median
wages have fallen by around 80%. It also means that overall GDP has crashed since
1970, since the price deﬂator now averages 6-7%, and nominal GDP has only
averaged around 4%. It would mean that the economy has literally been in recession
90% of the past 40 years.
The only reason we're not all starving in the street is from the miraculous gains in
manufacturing productivity and automation. But again, in this framework, that
process is largely exogenous to the terrible macroeconomic situation. If those gains
slow down even a little, and the macro trends continue, we're probably facing
imminent economic collapse. So maybe this is a plausible hypothesis, but it certainly
comes with a whole lot of extreme implications. I think medicine/education speciﬁc
cost disease is a much more likely explanation.
bkearns123:
One commonality in the examples cited is disintermediation/subsidies. College is
paid for by a third party, and ﬁnanced by generous government loans. Generous in
the sense that they are easy to get, not easy to get out of. Health care has massive
tax subsidies, and for a good period of time felt "free" to employees. Public schooling
is paid for indirectly.
Regarding the section on risk aversion, I happen to be in the playground business.
The most common injury is broken bones from a fall. Consequently, our industry has
ended up with poured in place surfacing, which costs 10x as much as mulch or pea
gravel. It is wonderful stuﬀ, but really increases the cost of the playground. Again, no
one pays directly for their playground, and the paying party cannot risk not being in
tune with the regulations.
Markets cannot function if the risk reward relationship is not direct.
fc123::
In all of these problem sectors it seems the resources consumed in each industry has
shifted to servicing and extending the deﬁnition of the marginal 'customer'. This can
explain I think some of the above
E.g.. 40 years ago hospitals received 100 customers. Ranked, patients 1-20 died. And
no one really tried to save them (some comfort but that was it). Today they are trying
(are obliged) to try to save patients no 5-15 (the 85 year old with triple bypass, 20
week premie). The total no of staﬀ needed for this task swamps increases in
individual productivity. You just need more people, even if they each are more
productive or trained than in the pasts. So salaries for each does not go up that
much, there are just more of them, total cost go up, and outcomes over the patients
treated are somewhat but not much better (some now make it but some fraction still
die). Hence medical curve shows some improvement but not 1:1 with cost.
In education, in the 1950-1970s we could aﬀord to socially promote non-academically
inclined students, not really expend eﬀort on them as long as they kept quiet in
class, then have them leave at age 16 to go work at Ford. Universities could count on
getting the higher performing students. Today, we have to deliver much weaker

students all the way to the end of high school, also force many into college. And ALL
the extra resources go to get this new lower end close to what used to be the
minimal university student performance. The top cohort gets little extra resources
and has not really improved. Hence, the scores across the new 'extended' student
population stays ﬂat.
I base this partly on what I have seen from my wife (engineering professor at top
university), resources are heavily consumed by the lower performing students, top
students have better opportunities than 20 years ago but in general the resources
are much less focused on them than on the marginal students.
So if you assume these industries for whatever reason shifted focus to servicing
deeper into the tail of the population aptitude/eﬀort over the years (I am not saying
this is good/bad, was for social reasons, for humanistic reasons or making any
comment), this would very much explain the overall cost rise, coupled with the lack
of desired improvement in statistics measured across the population that now gets
services as a whole.
In short, in the US we deﬁne policies that drive costs based on the tail of the
population, but we experience performance on the average. As an immigrant from a
third world country I think this is a big diﬀerence often invisible to the US-born
citizens I talk to. Maybe why this is a great country and I am here. All I can say is that
it is a world view that is not common world wide. Where I grew up, No Child Left
Behind law would have been designed as 1 Child Left Behind. There just were not the
resources, but more important, it was just more socially acceptable to just halve the
no of slots halfway through an academic program, for example.
So I guess the question is why are we so focused on pushing services into the tails
and will we continue to do so? Does society really beneﬁt from having a larger
fraction of the population capable of doing crappy algebra? Clearly there will be some
point where the cost becomes prohibitive and it will stop: maybe that is what we are
seeing now. But it is stunning that this was a 50 year process — if the dynamics in
social policy "markets" are that slow it is going to be really diﬃcult to manage.
CatCube::
I can't help but wonder if part of the ever-expanding expenses isn't that we mediate
our interactions through the legal system more than we used to.
What got me thinking about it was what I'm working on this week. To answer
Incurian's question above about why I was posting during the workday, I was
avoiding working on a report for selecting a contractor for a project I'm working on. (I
owe the taxpayer about three hours this weekend, since I spent time on Friday here
and reading about the Oroville Dam spillway.)
We had contractors submit proposals, and we had two structural engineers and a
construction quality assurance rep sit in a room for three days, writing our individual
reports about each proposal, then coming to agreement about how we rate them.
Then I have to write a report summarizing all of our individual reports, which gets fed
into the arcane machine that will eventually spit out an award. This process costs
about $10,000, and had zero value for evaluating the proposals. However, it has to
be done this way or we'll get dragged around in court by an oﬀeror's lawyer if they
choose to make a case of their rejection. I think that in years past they'd use a simple
low-bid process, which has its own problems, or the rejected contractors would bitch
to their Congressmen or something but wouldn't literally make a federal case of it.

LukHamilton:
I think you gave short shrift to libertarian explanations of this phenomena. In
particular, the Kling Theory of Public Choice may explain a signiﬁcant fraction of cost
disease: public policy will always choose to subsidize demand and restrict supply. If
you restrict supply holding everything else equal, prices will go up. If you subsidize
demand holding everything else equal, prices will go up. If you do both, prices will
really go up.
(1) Healthcare: The government restricts the supply of all healthcare professionals
(for example, doctors, nurses, CNAs, pharmacists, dentists, LPNs, etc.) via
occupational licensing. (I should note that maybe everyone can get behind the
simple idea that the number of doctors per 10,000 people in the US should at least
remain constant over time and not go down, as it has.) It restricts the supply of
healthcare organizations (for example, hospitals, surgery centers, etc.) via onerous
regulations, like the very ridiculous "certiﬁcate-of-need". You have already explained
in previous posts how things like the FDA restrict the supply of generic drugs. In
terms of demand, the government subsidizes health insurance via the corporate
income tax code, CHIP, the Obamacare marketplace, Medicaid, Medicare, etc.
(2) Education: I have done less investigation into this sector's regulations. You
mentioned Title IX. David Friedman has some nice blog posts on how the American
Bar Association's regulations on law schools make cheap law schools impossible.
(This same concept also applies to healthcare-related professional schools, by the
way.) If Bryan Caplan is right about signaling, a lot of education involves negative
externalities, so it should be taxed or limited by the government. Instead, it
subsidizes demand via loans. K-12 education, meanwhile, receives massive subsidies
from the government; everyone can enjoy a totally free K-12 education.
(3) Real estate: Land-use regulations restrict the supply of housing. (Explanations of
this can be found by googling "Matt Yglesias housing".) It also subsidizes housing via
Section 8, various other HUD programs, Freddie Mac, the mortgage-interest tax
deduction, etc.
In short, any industry that the United States government has a heavy hand in has/will
experience cost disease.
BenWave:
Scott, help me out here because I've read a long article about the mysterious nature
of rising costs in certain sectors as well as hundreds of bemused comments, and the
article had no more than a throwaway paragraph saying that maybe rising inequality
is a sign that the 'missing' money is ending up in the pockets of the super-wealthy
elite.
I come from a left-wing perspective, so I hope you can see that to me ex nihilo, "the
super wealthy are becoming much richer than was historically the case, also all of
these important services are becoming way more expensive than they used to be,
but the one does not explain the other" looks like an extraordinary claim. I would like
to see more evidence presented that this is not the case before updating in this
direction!
In particular, I can see that a large majority of the odd features you have picked out
about these services are acting exactly as predicted in Das Kapital volume 2, where
Marx studies the process of realisation of invested capital (ie, money spent on labour,

materials, tools etc) as the principal plus surplus value in money form. In particular,
some of his predictions were:
1. Gains made by workers through collective action in sites of production can be
taken away again by the landlord, the grocer, the ﬁnancier etc.
2. The diﬃculty in the realisation of capital will incentivise businesses to strive for
monopoly positions (whether by government mandate, mutual cooperations, quasi-
monopolies such as real estate, branding and advertising).
3. The tensions between the production of surplus value and the realisation of
surplus value will tend to set certain sectors of capital against one another - for
example landlords would prefer if workers were well paid, but had to spend larger
amounts of money on rent whereas factory owners would prefer to pay workers as
little as possible, and that includes low housing costs.
Later analysis in the tradition of Marx have noticed that ﬁnancial capital these days is
doing very very well compared to workers, but also compared to traditional
industrialists. And four out of the ﬁve of your examples are ﬁelds in which debt and
ﬁnancing plays a very large role. It's pretty easy to see that ﬁnancial capital would be
incentivised to make these things more expensive so that they can extract more
money through larger loans and ﬁnancing. (I'm not certain about subways. Are they
typically debt-ﬁnanced?).
Financial capital certainly has the economic and political power to push for this, and
they don't particularly care if they squeeze other holders of capital along they way.
They are debt-ﬁnanced ﬁelds in which large monopoly powers exist for one reason or
another. And while I acknowledge that bureacratic bloat is certainly playing its role,
I'm baﬄed by the relative lack of consideration of normal capitalist tendencies on
this thread. As far as I can see it is the single most important factor driving up the
costs of these services. Please present me with evidence that I am wrong about this!
Some additional links less-directly related or less easy to excerpt:
National Center for Policy Analysis: Should All Medicine Work Like Cosmetic Surgery?
Because plastic surgery isn't a life-or-death need, it's not covered by insurance. Costs in
the sector have risen 30% since 1992, compared to 118% for other types of health care.
Does this mean that being sheltered from the insurance system has sheltered it from
cost disease?
The American Interest: Why Can't We Have Nice Things? A breakdown of exactly why
infrastructure and transportation projects cost so much more in the US than elsewhere,
with an eye for Trump's promise of $1 trillion extra infrastructure spending.
Arnold Kling: What I Believe About Education. I have to include one "it's all the teachers'
unions fault" post for completeness here.
Neerav Kingsland on education spending and the role of charter schools
The comment thread on Marginal Revolution contains some insight
The Incidental Economist: What Makes The US Health Care System So Expensive FAQ.
From July 2011. Includes links to a lot of other things.
And some additional comments of my own:

I think any explanation that starts with "well, we have so much money now that we have
to spend it on something..." ignores that many people do not have so much money, and
in fact are really poor, but they get the same education and health care as the rest of us.
If the problem were just "rich people looking for places to throw their money away", there
would be other options for poor people who don't want to do that, the same way rich
people have fancy restaurants where they can throw their money away and poor people
have McDonalds.
Any explanation of the form "evil capitalists are scamming the rest of us for proﬁt" has to
explain why the cost increases are in the industries least exposed to evil capitalists. K-12
education is entirely nonproﬁt. Colleges are a mix but generally not owned by a single
rich guy who gets all the money. My hospital is owned by an order of nuns; studies show
that government hospitals have higher costs than for-proﬁt ones. Meanwhile, the
industries with the actual evil capitalists - tech, retail, restaurants, natural resources -
seem mostly immune to the cost disease. This is not promising. Also, this wouldn't
explain why so much of the money seems to be going to administrators/bells-and-
whistles. If prices increase by $100,000, and the money goes to hiring two extra
$50,000/year administrators, how does this help the capitalist proﬁting oﬀ it all?
Any explanation of the form "administrative bloat" or "ineﬃciency" has to explain why
non-bloated alternatives don't pop up or become popular. I'm sure the CEO of Ford would
love to just stop doing his job and approve every single funding request that passes his
desk and pay for it by jacking up the price of cars, but at some point if he did that too
much we'd all just buy Toyotas instead. Although there are some barriers to competition
in the hospital market, there are fewer such barriers in the college, private school, and
ambulatory clinic market. Why hasn't competition discouraged administrative bloat here
the same way it does in other industries?
Maybe a good time to reread the post How Likely Are Multifactorial Trends?

The Price Of Glee In China
[Epistemic status: Overly simplistic treatment of a horrifyingly complex topic; I can only hope I haven't missed enough to completely
embarrass myself]
I.
Noah Smith reviews recent economic research suggesting that globalization was a net
harm to working class people in rich countries like the US; he tentatively suggests this
could justify a weak form of protectionism. But Scott Sumner argues that's the wrong
way to look at things. Globalization fueled China's transition from a poor agrarian
economy to an industrialized modern nation. A billion people were lifted out of
poverty, an accomplishment Sumner calls "the best thing that ever happened". This is
far more important than the less dramatic costs imposed on the US. Therefore, even if
we agree globalization hurts the working class of rich nations, it's still a morally
defensible policy since it beneﬁts the needier working classes of much poorer nations.
On the one hand, this makes sense. On the other, here's happiness in China over the
past ﬁfteen years:
Measuring happiness is really hard, but the Chinese result seems as robust as any. You
get the same thing if you ask about satisfaction versus dissatisfaction. Brookings
analyzes ﬁve diﬀerent series of happiness data and concludes that "the Chinese
became less happy during their growth boom". The New York Times agrees and says
that "Chinese people's feelings of well-being have declined in [this] period of
momentous improvement in their economic lives". And this seems to be worst among
the poorest Chinese:
Nor does this seem to be an eﬀect from our happiness research just not being good
enough to capture changes in happiness even if they occur. There's good evidence
that increased income within a country increases happiness, and various other things
have been found to be eﬀective too. I would even argue we can ﬁnd happiness
changes in nations - recent surveys have found Iraq and Syria to be the least happy
nations in the world, and I doubt this was true before those countries' respective wars.
It seems to just be national GDP per capita that doesn't do anything.
This is Easterlin's Paradox, the observation that a country in general does not get
happier as it becomes richer. This is very controversial, with statisticians analyzing
and reanalyzing data and crunching it a bunch of diﬀerent ways. In the latest volley in
this eternal war, Easterlin's side came out with data from 37 countries over 30 years,
including many countries that underwent spectacular growth during that time, and
conﬁrmed their original conclusion.
There are certainly graphs like this one that propose a nice clear log relationship
between income and happiness:
But I ﬁnd the exact breakdown much more interesting:

Here we see a lot of cultural variation in this apparent happiness-income relationship.
For example, Latin American countries are consistently poor but happy; Eastern
European countries are usually richer but sadder than African countries, et cetera.
Looking at the original graph above, you'd expect Chinese growth to make them much
happier; looking at this graph, you notice that China's three rich neighbors - Japan,
Taiwan, and South Korea - are all about as happy as China. South Korea, despite
making ﬁve times more money, is less happy than China is. If China's income
quintuples, why would you expect it to look like France or Ireland rather than South
Korea?
Just to rub this in a little:
A UN report theorizes that although richer countries tend to be happier, this is more
likely due to factors other than income, like freedom, social trust, and stable families.
These may be stable on scales much longer than income is, and may be related to
culture.
II.
Let's assume for a second that all this is true. National income does not matter for
national happiness, and if China's growth continues to skyrocket then in twenty years
it will be as rich as Japan but not an iota happier than it is today. What do we do with
this kind of knowledge?
Or let me ask a more speciﬁc question. Suppose that some free trade pact will
increase US unemployment by 1%, but also accelerate the development of some
undeveloped foreign country like India into hyper-speed. In twenty years, India's GDP
per capita will go from $1,500/year to $10,000/year. The only cost will be a million or
so extra unemployed Americans, plus all that coal that the newly vibrant India is
burning probably won't be very good for the ﬁght against global warming.
Part of me wants to argue that obviously we should sign the trade pact; as utilitarians
we should agree with Sumner that lifting 1.4 billion Chinese out of poverty was "the
best thing that ever happened" and so lifting 1.2 billion Indians out of poverty would
be the second-best thing that ever happened, far more important than any possible
risks. But if Easterlin is right, those Indians won't be any happier, the utility gain will
be nil, and all we will have done is worsened global warming and kicked a million
Americans out of work for no reason (and they will deﬁnitely be unhappy).
Or since most of us don't get the option to sign trade pacts, here's a more relevant
question. Suppose we are eﬀective altruists. We have the opportunity to cure disease
(at relatively high costs) or boost national development (at relatively low costs).
Assume the numbers work out such that if we took a simple 'development = good'
perspective, then donating to the development charity would be a no-brainer. Should
we donate to the disease-cure charity anyway?
A couple of years ago, I learned that people who were paralyzed in car accidents took
a few months to adjust to their new situation, but after that were no less happy than
people who were still healthy and abled. Then last December I learned that this was
an urban legend, that people who were paralyzed in car accidents were mostly as
miserable as you would expect. But for those few years while I still believed that

particular factoid, I was a little creeped out. Was a doctor who helps car accident
victims recover their function wasting her life? If people got genuine enjoyment from
driving drunk at 95 mph while shouting "WOOOOOOOOOOOOO!", was there any
reason to make them stop, since they weren't really hurting anybody?
(I admit I'm skipping over factors like how paralyzed people can't earn any income to
pay into the tax system and stuﬀ, but I'm just saying I would be pretty creeped out if
that were the only reason we should avoid car accidents.)
Again assuming I haven't made some simple calculation mistake, I can think of three
ways to go from here. First, abandon consequentialism entirely (I understand that
having children will likely decrease my happiness, but I still want to have children
because I value them for non-utilitarian reasons). Second, switch to a
consequentialism based on non-subjective things like maximizing development and
industrialization as a terminal goal (Really? Even if everyone hates it? Does it matter
what the factories are building? How about paper clips?). Third, switch to preference
utilitarianism.
Preference utilitarianism is tempting and I was kind of in favor of it already, but I don't
ﬁnd it completely satisfying. Suppose I myself am an Indian peasant. Should I have a
preference for my society industrializing? If I'm not going to be any happier after it
does, and supposing there's no inherent moral value in industrialization, why bother?
And if Indian peasants want their country to industrialize anyway, aren't we as
Americans allowed to say we don't take their preference that seriously? If some hippie
said they wanted to go on some Spiritual Yoga Nature Retreat that would turn their life
around and bring them constant bliss, but we knew it was a complete fraud that
wouldn't help them at all, would we still feel a moral obligation to help fund that
hippie's retreat? How are the two situations diﬀerent?
There's a risk of being patronizing here - telling the Indians "Oh, you don't need to
industrialize, it's not so great anyway," even while we ourselves enjoy our nice food
and ﬂat-screen TVs. If we were to actively try to keep the Indians from industrializing,
that would be pretty awful. But that's not the argument at hand here. The argument
at hand is "are we morally required to sacriﬁce our own economy in order to help the
Indians industrialize?", and I feel like that's a hard sell if industrialization doesn't really
help the Indians.
And there's also a risk that I might be misdeﬁning happiness. Maybe every way
economists have hitherto measured happiness is hopelessly deﬁcient, and there's
some ineﬀable essence of happiness which, if we could get at it, would increase
during national development. I admit that all of these subjective well-being indices are
kind of sketchy and change a lot with the wording that you use or don't use.
A ﬁnal option for rescuing common sense might be acknowledging that economic
progress doesn't change happiness yet. That is, there are ways to convert economic
(and closely linked technological) progress into happiness, but most countries are not
making use of them - either for political reasons, or because they don't know about
them, or because we haven't gotten enough technological and economic progress to
reach them yet. This seems probably true to me - if nothing else, a technological
singularity ought to help - but this situation looks a lot diﬀerent from the situation
where incremental progress increases happiness. In particular, it would make us want
to concentrate our resources on increasing technological progress, perhaps in the
richest economies, rather than trying to help poor countries in particular.

None of these possibilities really appeal to me, and I am forced to acknowledge that
happiness research remains a very strange ﬁeld whose conclusions make no sense to
me and which tempt me to crazy beliefs and actions if I take them seriously.
I guess we're done ﬁghting racism. Good job, guys.

Things Probably Matter
A while back when I wrote about how China's economic development might not have
increased happiness there much, Scott Sumner wrote a really interesting response,
Does Anything Matter?
He points out that it's too easy to make this about exotic far-oﬀ Chinese. Much the
same phenomenon occurs closer to home:
If nothing really matters in China, if even overcoming horrible problems doesn't
make the Chinese better oﬀ, then what's the use of favoring or opposing any
public policy? After all, America also shows no rise in average happiness since the
1950s, despite:
1. A big rise in real wages.
2. Environmental clean-up (including lead-does Flint matter?)
3. Civil rights for African Americans
4. Feminism, gay rights.
5. Dentists now use Novocain (My childhood cavities were ﬁlled without it)
6. 1000 channels in glorious widescreen HDTV
7. Blogs
I could go on and on. And yet, if the surveys are to be believed, we are no happier
than before. And I think it's very possible that we are in fact no happier than
before, that there's a sort of law of the conservation of happiness. As I walk down
the street, grown-ups don't seem any happier than the grown-ups I recall as a kid.
Does that mean that all of those wonderful societal achievements since 1950 were
absolutely worthless?
But there are exceptions. I recall reading that surveys showed a rise in European
happiness in the decades after WWII, and Scott reports that happiness is currently
very low in Iraq and Syria. So that suggests that current conditions do matter.
The following hypothesis will sound really ad hoc, but matches the way a lot of
people I know talk about their lives. Suppose people's happiness is normally
calibrated around the sort of lifestyle that they view as "normal." As America got
richer after 1950, it all seemed very normal, so people didn't report more
happiness. Ditto for China during the boom years. Everyone around you was also
doing better, so you started thinking about how you were doing relative to your
neighbors. But Germans walking through the rubble of Berlin in 1948, or Syrians
doing so today in Aleppo, do see their plight as abnormal. They remember a time
before the war. So they report less happiness than during normal times.
The obvious retort is - modern Chinese grew up when China was very poor. Why didn't
they calibrate themselves to poverty, such that sudden wealth seems good? What's
the diﬀerence between a Chinese person going from poverty to wealth, versus a
Syrian going from stability to chaos? Might it be a shorter time course? A sudden
shock is noticeable, a gradual thirty-year improvement in living standards isn't?
Probably not. There seem to be a lot of cases where happiness of large groups does
change gradually in response to social trends less dramatic than a world war.

First, consider African-Americans. The New York Times calls the increase in black
happiness over the past forty years "one of the most dramatic gains in the happiness
data that you'll see". This is not just about poverty; in 1970, blacks who earned more
than 75% of whites were only in the tenth percentile of white happiness. Today, those
blacks would be in the ﬁftieth percentile; they're still doing worse than would be
expected based on income, but not nearly as much worse. This is a very sensible and
predictable thing to ﬁnd. Black people face a lot less racism and discrimination today
than in 1970 [citation needed], so assuming that was really unpleasant we shouldn't
be surprised that they're happier. But notice that this is a time course very similar to
the rise of China! It doesn't look like black people picked a happiness level to calibrate
on and then never bothered to adjust. It looks like they adjusted exactly like we would
expect them to, even over the course of a multi-decade change.
Second, consider women. In 1970, US women were generally happier than US men.
Today, the reverse is true. There seems to be a general pattern around the world of
women being happier than men in traditional societies and less happy than men in
modern societies (though see Language Log for a contrary perspective). I don't think
of this as a weird paradox. It seems perfectly reasonable to me that having to work
outside the home makes people less happy, getting to spend time with their family
makes them more happy, and having to work outside the home but also being
expected to take care of your family at the same time makes them least happy of all.
In any case, the point is that the numbers are changing. Men and women aren't just
ﬁxating on some level of happiness and staying there, they're altering their happiness
level based on real trends, just like African-Americans did (but apparently unlike
Chinese).
Third, I was ﬁnally able to ﬁnd a paper that had really good data on change in
happiness in diﬀerent countries, and it supports the idea that happiness can change
signiﬁcantly on a countrywide level.
This is change in happiness in a bunch of countries between about 1990 and 2010
(the years were slightly diﬀerent in each country). There are other graphs for related
concepts like life satisfaction and subjective well-being that look about the same.
The most striking ﬁnding is that most countries got happier between those two years -
sometimes a lot happier. In Mexico, the percent of people saying they were very
happy increased by 25 percentage points!
Just eyeballing the graph, there's not an obvious relationship between happiness and
economic growth - China is still near the bottom like we talked about before, and
France - a country that's been First World since forever - is near the top. Even Japan,
which is famous for its decades of stagnation, has done pretty well. But the authors
tell us that after doing their statistical analyses, there is a strong relationship with
economic growth. Okay, I guess.
They also say there's a dramatic relationship with freedom and democracy. Mexico,
the top country on the graph, went from a relatively closed to a relatively democratic
government during this time. South Africa, number ﬁve, went from apartheid to no
apartheid. Some of the ex-Communist countries like Poland and Ukraine also look
pretty good here. On the other hand, other ex-Communist countries like Lithuania and
Estonia are near the bottom. I wonder if this has to do with cutoﬀ points - since every
country started at a slightly diﬀerent time, maybe they began sampling Poland during

the worst parts of Soviet dictatorship and got Lithuania right in the ﬁrst euphoria of
independence? I don't know. It all seems very noisy.
They also mention that the United States' supposedly level happiness is kind of a
misunderstanding. People say things like "Happiness in the US has been ﬂat from
1950 to today", but in fact it declined from 1950 to 1979 and increased from 1980 to
today. They attribute this to the 1950s being unusually happy; then the 60s and 70s
being unusually conﬂict-prone, and the Reagan Revolution and Clinton years were
back to being optimistic. They don't have data that stretches too long after that.
(This is pretty neat for Reagan and Clinton. When I die, I'll consider my life a success if
people attribute a spike on national happiness graphs to my inﬂuence.)
So apparently population happiness levels do change in response to relevant social
changes, even on multi-decade timescales. Which brings us back to asking - what's
up with China?
The graph above shows India as doing okay - not great, but okay. But a similar graph
on subjective well-being - which should be another way of looking at the same thing -
shows India as doing pretty poorly, right down there with China - even though its GDP
per capita quadrupled during the period of study.
I see a lot of conﬂicting perspectives about whether economic growth increases
national happiness. It may, but the eﬀect isn't as big as you'd expect, and is usually
overpowered by other factors. Maybe it isn't even direct, but has something to do with
development increasing democracy, liberalism, rule of law, and stability. China got the
development, but its happiness genuinely didn't increase because of country-speciﬁc
factors that have something to do with how it developed (inequality? pollution?
authoritarianism?).
This matches the race and gender data. Blacks saw a big happiness boost during a
time when their feeling of freedom (but not their income) increased relative to whites.
Women saw a small happiness drop during a time when their income (but not their
feeling of freedom) increased relative to men.
So it looks like happiness can change. It just didn't change in China over the past
thirty years. The apparent paradox of improving economic situation and
stable/decreasing happiness is genuinely paradoxical. Intangibles are probably just
way more important than money, even amounts of money big enough to raise whole
countries out of poverty.

How The West Was Won
I.
Someone recently linked me to Bryan Caplan's post A Hardy Weed: How Traditionalists
Underestimate Western Civ. He argues that "western civilization"'s supposed
defenders don't give it enough credit. They're always worrying about it being
threatened by Islam or China or Degeneracy or whatever, but in fact western
civilization can not only hold its own against these threats but actively outcompetes
them:
The fragility thesis is ﬂat wrong. There is absolutely no reason to think that
Western civilization is more fragile than Asian civilization, Islamic civilization, or
any other prominent rivals. At minimum, Western civilization can and does
perpetuate itself the standard way: sheer conformity and status quo bias.
But saying that Western civilization is no more fragile than other cultures is a
gross understatement. The truth is that Western civilization is taking over the
globe. In virtually any fair ﬁght, it steadily triumphs. Why? Because, as fans of
Western civ ought to know, Western civ is better. Given a choice, young people
choose Western consumerism, gender norms, and entertainment. Anti-Western
governments from Beijing to Tehran know this this to be true: Without draconian
censorship and social regulation, "Westoxiﬁcation" will win.
A big part of the West's strength, I hasten to add, is its openness to awesomeness.
When it encounters competing cultures, it gleefully identiﬁes competitors' best
traits - then adopts them as its own. By the time Western culture commands the
globe, it will have appropriated the best features of Asian and Islamic culture.
Even its nominal detractors will be Westernized in all but name. Picture how
contemporary Christian fundamentalists' consumerism and gender roles would
have horriﬁed Luther or Calvin. Western civ is a good winner. It doesn't demand
total surrender. It doesn't make fans of competing cultures formally recant their
errors. It just tempts them in a hundred diﬀerent ways until they tacitly convert.
Traditionalists' laments for Western civilization deeply puzzle me. Yes, it's easy to
dwell on setbacks. In a world of seven billion people, you can't expect Western
culture to win everywhere everyday. But do traditionalists seriously believe that
freshman Western civ classes are the wall standing between us and barbarism?
Have they really failed to notice the fact that Western civilization ﬂourishes all
over the globe, even when hostile governments ﬁght it tooth and nail? It is time
for the friends of Western civilization to learn a lesson from its enemies: Western
civ is a hardy weed. Given half a chance, it survives, spreads, and conquers.
Peacefully.
I worry that Caplan is eliding the important summoner/demon distinction. This is an
easy distinction to miss, since demons often kill their summoners and wear their skin.
But in this case, he's become hopelessly confused without it.
I am pretty sure there was, at one point, such a thing as western civilization. I think it
involved things like dancing around maypoles and copying Latin manuscripts. At some
point Thor might have been involved. That civilization is dead. It summoned an alien
entity from beyond the void which devoured its summoner and is proceeding to eat
the rest of the world.

An analogy: naturopaths like to use the term "western medicine" to refer to the
evidence-based medicine of drugs and surgeries you would get at your local hospital.
They contrast this with traditional Chinese medicine and Ayurvedic medicine, which it
has somewhat replaced, apparently a symptom of the "westernization" of Chinese and
Indian societies.
But "western medicine" is just medicine that works. It happens to be western because
the West had a technological head start, and so discovered most of the medicine that
works ﬁrst. But there's nothing culturally western about it; there's nothing Christian or
Greco-Roman about using penicillin to deal with a bacterial infection. Indeed, "western
medicine" replaced the traditional medicine of Europe - Hippocrates' four humors -
before it started threatening the traditional medicines of China or India. So-called
"western medicine" is an inhuman perfect construct from beyond the void, summoned
by Westerners, which ate traditional Western medicine ﬁrst and is now proceeding to
eat the rest of the world.
"Western culture" is no more related to the geographical west than western medicine.
People who complain about western culture taking over their country always manage
to bring up Coca-Cola. But in what sense is Coca-Cola culturally western? It's an
Ethiopian bean mixed with a Colombian leaf mixed with carbonated water and lots
and lots of sugar. An American was the ﬁrst person to discover that this combination
tasted really good - our technological/economic head start ensured that. But in a
world where America never existed, eventually some Japanese or Arabian chemist
would have found that sugar-ﬁlled ﬁzzy drinks were really tasty. It was a discovery
waiting to be plucked out of the void, like penicillin. America summoned it but did not
create it. If western medicine is just medicine that works, soda pop is just refreshment
that works.
The same is true of more intellectual "products". Caplan notes that foreigners
consume western gender norms, but these certainly aren't gender norms that would
have been recognizable to Cicero, St. Augustine, Henry VIII, or even Voltaire. They're
gender norms that sprung up in the aftermath of the Industrial Revolution and its
turbulent intermixing of the domestic and public economies. They arose because they
worked. The West was the ﬁrst region to industrialize and realize those were the
gender norms that worked for industrial societies, and as China and Arabia
industrialize they're going to ﬁnd the same thing.
Caplan writes:
A big part of the West's strength, I hasten to add, is its openness to awesomeness.
When it encounters competing cultures, it gleefully identiﬁes competitors' best
traits - then adopts them as its own. By the time Western culture commands the
globe, it will have appropriated the best features of Asian and Islamic culture.
Certainly he's pointing at a real phenomenon - sushi has spread almost as rapidly as
Coke. But in what sense has sushi been "westernized"? Yes, Europe has adopted sushi.
But so have China, India, and Africa. Sushi is another refreshment that works, a crack
in the narrative that what's going on is "westernization" in any meaningful sense.
Here's what I think is going on. Maybe every culture is the gradual accumulation of
useful environmental adaptations combined with random memetic drift. But this is
usually a gradual process with plenty of room for everybody to adjust and local
peculiarities to seep in. The Industrial Revolution caused such rapid change that the

process become qualitatively diﬀerent, a frantic search for better adaptations to an
environment that was itself changing almost as fast as people could understand it.
The Industrial Revolution also changed the way culture was spatially distributed. When
the fastest mode of transportation is the horse, and the postal system is frequently
ambushed by Huns, almost all culture is local culture. England develops a culture,
France develops a culture, Spain develops a culture. Geographic, language, and
political barriers keep these from intermixing too much. Add rapid communication -
even at the level of a good postal service - and the equation begins to change. In the
17th century, philosophers were remarking (in Latin, the universal language!) about
how Descartes from France had more in common with Leibniz from Germany than
either of them did with the average Frenchman or German. Nowadays I certainly have
more in common with SSC readers in Finland than I do with my next-door neighbor
whom I've never met.
Improved trade and communication networks created a rapid ﬂow of ideas from one
big commercial center to another. Things that worked - western medicine, Coca-Cola,
egalitarian gender norms, sushi - spread along the trade networks and started
outcompeting things that didn't. It happened in the west ﬁrst, but not in any kind of a
black-and-white way. Places were inducted into the universal culture in proportion to
their participation in global trade; Shanghai was infected before West Kerry; Dubai is
further gone than Alabama. The great ﬁnancial capitals became a single cultural
region in the same way that "England" or "France" had been a cultural region in the
olden times, gradually converging on more and more ideas that worked in their new
economic situation.
Let me say again that this universal culture, though it started in the West, was
western only in the most cosmetic ways. If China or the Caliphate had industrialized
ﬁrst, they would have been the ones who developed it, and it would have been much
the same. The new sodas and medicines and gender norms invented in Beijing or
Baghdad would have spread throughout the world, and they would have looked very
familiar. The best way to industrialize is the best way to industrialize.
II.
Something Caplan was pointing towards but never really said outright: universal
culture is by deﬁnition the only culture that can survive without censorship.
He writes in his post:
The truth is that Western civilization is taking over the globe. In virtually any fair
ﬁght, it steadily triumphs. Why? Because, as fans of Western civ ought to know,
Western civ is better. Given a choice, young people choose Western consumerism,
gender norms, and entertainment. Anti-Western governments from Beijing to
Tehran know this this to be true: Without draconian censorship and social
regulation, "Westoxiﬁcation" will win.
Universal culture is the collection of the most competitive ideas and products. Coca-
Cola spreads because it tastes better than whatever people were drinking before.
Egalitarian gender norms spread because they're more popular and likeable than their
predecessors. If there was something that outcompeted Coca-Cola, then that would be
the oﬃcial soda of universal culture and Coca-Cola would be consigned to the
scrapheap of history.

The only reason universal culture doesn't outcompete everything else instantly and
achieve ﬁxation around the globe is barriers to communication. Some of those barriers
are natural - Tibet survived universalization for a long time because nobody could get
to it. Sometimes the barrier is time - universal culture can't assimilate every little hill
and valley instantly. Other times there are no natural barriers, and then your choice is
to either accept assimilation into universal culture, or put up some form of censorship.
Imagine that Tibet wants to protect its traditional drink of yak's milk. The Dalai Lama
requests that everyone continue to drink yak's milk. But Coca-Cola tastes much better
than yak's milk, and everyone knows this. So it becomes a coordination problem: even
if individual Tibetans would prefer that their neighbors all drink yak's milk to preserve
the culture, they want to drink Coca-Cola. The only way yak's milk stays popular is if
the Dalai Lama bans Coca-Cola from the country.
But westerners aren't banning yak's milk to "protect" their cultures. They don't have
to. Universal culture is high-entropy; it's already in its ground state and will survive
and spread without help. All other cultures are low-entropy; they survive only if
someone keeps pushing energy into the system to protect them. It could be the Dalai
Lama banning Coca-Cola. It could be the Académie Française removing English words
from the language. It could be the secret police killing anyone who speaks out against
Comrade Stalin. But if you want anything other than universal culture, you better
either be surrounded by some very high mountains, or be willing to get your hands
dirty.
There's one more sense in which universal culture is high-entropy; I think it might be
the only culture that can really survive high levels of immigration.
I've been wondering for a long time - how come groups that want to protect their
traditional cultures worry about immigration? After all, San Francisco is frequently said
to have a thriving gay culture. There's a strong Hasidic Jewish culture in New York City.
Everyone agrees that the US has something called "black culture", although there's
debate over exactly what it entails. But only 6% of San Francisco is gay. Only 1% of
New Yorkers are Hasidim. Only about 11% of Americans are black. So these groups
have all managed to maintain strong cultures while being vastly outnumbered by
people who are diﬀerent from them.
So why is anyone concerned about immigration threatening their culture? Suppose
that Tibet was utterly overwhelmed by immigrants, tens of millions of them. No matter
how many people you import, Tibetan people couldn't possibly get more outnumbered
in their own country than gays, Hasidim, and blacks already are. But those groups
hold on to their cultures just ﬁne. Wouldn't we expect Tibetans (or Americans, or
English people) to do the same?
I'm still not totally sure about the answer to this one, but once again I think it makes
more sense when we realize that Tibet is competing not against Western culture, but
against universal culture.
And here, universal culture is going to win, simply because it's designed to deal with
diverse multicultural environments. Remember, diﬀerent strategies can succeed in
diﬀerent equilibria. In a world full of auto-cooperators, defect-bot hits the jackpot. In a
world full of tit-for-tat-players, defect-bot crashes and burns. Likewise, in a world
where everybody else follows Tibetan culture, Tibetan culture may do very well. In a
world where there are lots of diﬀerent cultures all mixed together, Tibetan culture
might not have any idea what to do.

(one more hypothetical, to clarify what I'm talking about - imagine a culture where the
color of someone's clothes tells you a lot of things about them - for example, anyone
wearing red is a prostitute. This may work well as long as everyone follows the
culture. If you mix it 50-50 with another culture that doesn't have this norm, then
things go downhill quickly; you proposition a lady wearing red, only to get pepper
sprayed in the eye. Eventually the ﬁrst culture gives up and stops trying to
communicate messages through clothing color.)
I think universal culture has done a really good job adapting to this through a strategy
of social atomization; everybody does their own thing in their own home, and the
community exists to protect them and perform some lowest common denominator
functions that everyone can agree on. This is a really good way to run a multicultural
society without causing any conﬂict, but it requires a very speciﬁc set of cultural
norms and social technologies to work properly, and only universal culture has
developed these enough to pull it oﬀ.
Because universal culture is better at dealing with multicultural societies, the more
immigrants there are, the more likely everyone will just default to universal culture in
public spaces. And eventually the public space will creep further and further until
universal culture becomes the norm.
If you don't understand the diﬀerence between western culture and universal culture,
this looks like the immigrants assimilating - "Oh, before these people were Chinese
people behaving in their foreign Chinese way, but now they're Westerners just like
us." Once you make the distinction, it looks like both Chinese people and traditional
Americans assimilating into universal culture in order to share a common ground -
with this being invisible to people who are already assimilated into universal culture,
to whom it just looks "normal".
III.
I stress these points because the incorrect model of "foreign cultures being
Westernized" casts Western culture as the aggressor, whereas the model of "every
culture is being universalized" ﬁnds Western culture to be as much a victim as
anywhere else. Coca-Cola might have replaced traditional yak's milk in Mongolia, but
it also replaced traditional apple cider in America. A Hopi Indian saddened that her
children no longer know the old ritual dances diﬀers little from a Southern Baptist
incensed that her kids no longer go to church. Universal values have triumphed over
both.
Our society is generally in favor of small, far-away, or exotic groups trying to maintain
their culture. We think it's great that the Hopi are trying to get the next generation to
participate in the traditional dances. We support the Tibetans' attempt to maintain
their culture in the face of pressure from China. We promote black culture, gay
culture, et cetera. We think of it as a tragedy when the dominant culture manages to
take over and destroy one of these smaller cultures. For example, when white
American educators taught Native American children to identify with white American
culture and ignore the old ways, that was inappropriate and in some senses
"genocidal" if the aim was to destroy Native Americans as a separate people. We get
excited by the story of Bhutan, the tiny Himalayan kingdom trying to preserve its
natural and human environment and prevent its own McDonaldization. We tend to be
especially upset when the destruction of cultures happens in the context of
colonialism, ie a large and powerful country trying to take over and eliminate the

culture of a smaller country. Some examples include the English in Ireland, the English
in India, the English in Africa, and basically the English anywhere.
One of the most common justiﬁcations for colonialism is that a more advanced and
enlightened society is taking over an evil and oppressive society. For example, when
China invaded Tibet, they said that this was because Tibet was a feudal hellhole where
most of the people were living in abject slavery and where people who protested the
rule of the lamas were punished by having their eyes gouged out (true!). They
declared the anniversary of their conquest "Serfs Emancipation Day" and force the
Tibetans to celebrate it every year. They say that anyone who opposes the Chinese,
supports the Dalai Lama, or ﬂies the old Tibetan ﬂag is allied with the old feudal lords
and wants to celebrate a culture based around serfdom and oppression.
But opponents of colonialism tend to believe that cultures are valuable and need to be
protected in and of themselves. This is true even if the culture is very poor, if the
culture consists of people who aren't very well-educated by Western standards, even
if they believe in religions that we think are stupid, even if those cultures have
unsavory histories, et cetera. We tend to allow such cultures to resist outside
inﬂuences, and we even celebrate such resistance. If anybody were to say that, for
example, Native Americans are poor and ignorant, have a dumb religion with all sorts
of unprovable "spirits", used to be involved in a lot of killing and raiding and slave-
taking - and so we need to burn down their culture and raise their children in our own
superior culture - that person would be incredibly racist and they would not be worth
listening to. We celebrate when cultures choose preservation of their traditional
lifestyles over mere economic growth, like Bhutan's gross national happiness program.
This is true in every case except with the cultures we consider our outgroups - in the
US, white Southern fundamentalist Christian Republicans; in the UK, white rural
working-class leave voters. In both cases, their ignorance is treated as worthy of
mockery, their religion is treated as stupidity and failure to understand science, their
poverty makes them "trailer trash", their rejection of economic-growth-at-all-costs
means they are too stupid to understand the stakes, and their desire to protect their
obviously inferior culture makes them xenophobic and racist. Although we laugh at
the Chinese claim that the only reason a Tibetan could identify with their own culture
and want to ﬂy its ﬂag is because they support serfdom and eye-gouging, we
solemnly nod along with our own culture's claim that the only reason a Southerner
could identify with their own culture and want to ﬂy its ﬂag is because they support
racism and slavery.
(one question I got on the post linked above was why its description of American
tribes seemed to ﬁt other countries so well. I think the answer is because most
countries' politics are centered around the conﬂict between more-universalized and
less-universalized segments of the population.)
We could even look at this as a form of colonialism - if Brexit supporters and
opponents lived on two diﬀerent islands and had diﬀerent colored skin, then people in
London saying things like "These people are so butthurt that we're destroying their so-
called 'culture', but they're really just a bunch of ignorant rubes, and they don't
realize they need us elites to keep their country running, so screw them," would sound
a lot more sinister. The insistence that they tolerate unwanted immigration into their
lands would look a lot like how China is trying to destroy Tibet by exporting millions of
people to it in the hopes they will eventually outnumber the recalcitrant native
Tibetans (if you don't believe me, believe the Dalai Lama, who apparently has the

same perspective). The claim that they're confused bout their own economic self-
interest would give way to discussions of Bhutan style "gross national happiness".
(I get accused of being crypto-conservative around here every so often, but I think I'm
just taking my anti-colonialism position to its logical conclusion. A liberal getting upset
about how other liberals are treating conservatives, doesn't become conservative
himself, any more than an American getting upset about how other Americans treat
Iraqis becomes an Iraqi.)
And I worry that confusing "universal culture" with "Western culture" legitimizes this
weird double standard. If universal culture and Western culture are the same thing,
then Western culture doesn't need protection - as Caplan points out, it's the giant
unstoppable wave of progress sweeping over everything else. Or maybe it doesn't
deserve protection - after all, it's the colonialist ideology that tried to destroy local
cultures and set itself up as supreme. If Western culture is already super-strong and
has a history of trying to take over everywhere else, then surely advocating
"protecting Western culture" must be a code phrase for something more sinister. We
can sympathize with foreign cultures like the Tibetans who are actually under threat,
but sympathizing with any Western culture in any way would just be legitimizing
aggression.
But I would argue that it's universal culture which is the giant unstoppable wave of
progress, and that it was universal culture that was responsible for colonizing other
cultures and replacing them with itself. And universal culture's continuing attempts to
subjugate the last unassimilated remnants of traditional western culture are just part
of this trend.
IV.
I am mostly just on the side of consistency. After that I have no idea what to do.
One argument is that we should consistently support traditional cultures' attempts to
defend themselves against universal culture. Support the Native Americans' ability to
practice their old ways, support traditional Siberians trying to return to their
shamanistic roots, support Australian Aborigines' rights to continue the old rituals,
support Tibetans' rights to practice Vajrayana Buddhism, and support rural British
people trying to protect Ye Olde England from the changes associated with increased
immigration. For most people, this would mean extending the compassion that they
feel to the Aborigines, peasants, and Tibetans to apply to the British as well.
But another argument is that we should consistently support universal culture's
attempt to impose progress on traditional cultures. Maybe we should tell the Native
Americans that if they embraced global capitalism, they could have a tacqueria, sushi
restaurant, and kebab place all on the same street in their reservation. Maybe we
should tell the Aborigines that modern science says the Dreamtime is a myth they
need to stop clinging to dumb disproven ideas. Maybe we should tell the Tibetans that
Vajrayana Buddhism is too intolerant of homosexuality. Take our conviction that rural
Englanders are just racist and xenophobic and ill-informed, and extend that to
everyone else who's trying to resist a way of life that's objectively better.
I am sort of torn on this.
On the one hand, universal culture is objectively better. Its science is more correct, its
economy will grow faster, its soft drinks are more refreshing, its political systems are
(necessarily) freer, and it is (in a certain speciﬁc sense) what everybody would select

if given a free choice. It also seems morally better. The Tibetans did gouge out the
eyes of would-be-runaway serfs. I realize the circularity of saying that universal
culture is objectively morally better based on it seeming so to me, a universal culture
member - but I am prepared to suspend that paradox in favor of not wanting people's
eyes gouged out for resisting slavery.
On the other hand, I think that "universal culture is what every society would select if
given the opportunity" is less of a knock-down point than it would seem. Heroin use is
something every society would select if given the opportunity. That is, if nobody
placed "censorship" on the spread of heroin, it would rapidly spread from country to
country, becoming a major part of that country's society. Instead, we implement an
almost authoritarian level of control on it, because we know that even though it would
be very widely adopted, it's not something that is good for anybody in the long term.
An opponent of universal culture could say it has the same property.
Things get even worse when you remember that cultures are multi-agent games and
each agent pursuing its own self-interest might be a disaster for the whole. Pollution is
a good example of this; if the best car is very polluting, and one car worth of pollution
is minimal but many cars' worth of pollution is toxic, then absent good coordination
mechanisms everyone will choose the best car even though everyone would prefer a
world where nobody (including them) had the best car. I may have written about this
before.
I'm constantly intrigued (though always a little skeptical) by claims that "primitive"
cultures live happier and more satisfying lives than our own. I know of several of this
type. First, happiness surveys that tend to ﬁnd Latin American countries doing as well
or better than much richer and more advanced European countries. Second, the
evidence from the Amish, whose children are allowed to experience the modern
culture around them but who usually prefer to stay in Amish society. Third, Axtell's
paper on prisoner exchanges between early US colonists and Native Americans;
colonists captured by the natives almost always wanted to stay and live with the
natives; natives captured by the colonists never wanted to stay and live with the
colonists. Many people have remarked on how more culturally homogenous countries
seem happier. Bhutan itself might be evidence here, although I've seen wildly
diﬀerent claims on where it falls on happiness surveys. I've also talked before about
how China's happiness level stayed stable or even dropped during its period of rapid
development.
(on the other hand, there's also a lot of counterevidence. More democratic countries
seem to be happier, and democracies will generally be the low-censorship countries
that get more assimilated into universal culture. Free market economies are happier.
Some studies say that more liberal countries are happier. And there's a complicated
but positive relationship between national happiness and wealth.)
I also think that it might be reasonable to have continuation of your own culture as a
terminal goal, even if you know your culture is "worse" in some way than what would
replace it. There's a transhumanist joke - "Instead of protecting human values, why
not reprogram humans to like hydrogen? After all, there's a lot of hydrogen." There's
way more hydrogen than beautiful art, or star-crossed romances, or exciting
adventures. A human who likes beautiful art, star-crossed romances, and exciting
adventures is in some sense "worse" than a human who likes hydrogen, since it would
be much harder for her to achieve her goals and she would probably be much less
happy. But knowing this does not make me any happier about the idea of being
reprogrammed in favor of hydrogen-related goals. My own value system might not be

objectively the best, or even very good, but it's my value system and I want to keep it
and you can't take it away from me. I am an individualist and I think of this on an
individual level, but I could also see having this self-preservation-against-optimality
urge for my community and its values.
(I've sometimes heard this called Lovecraftian parochialism, based on H.P. Lovecraft's
philosophy that the universe is vast and incomprehensible and anti-human, and
you've got to draw the line between Self and Other somewhere, so you might as well
draw the line at 1920s Providence, Rhode Island, and call everywhere else from
Boston all the way to the unspeakable abyss-city of Y'ha-nthlei just diﬀerent degrees
of horribleness.)
Overall I am not 100% convinced either way. Maybe some traditional cultures are
worse than universal culture and others are better? Mostly the confusion makes me
want to err on the side of allowing people to go either direction as they see ﬁt, barring
atrocities. Which are of course hard to deﬁne.
I like the Jewish idea of the Noahide Laws, where the Jews say "We are not going to
impose our values on anyone else...except these seven values which we think are
incredibly important and breaking them is totally beyond the pale." Sometimes I wish
universal culture would just establish a couple of clear Noahide Laws - two of them
could be "no slavery" and "no eye-gouging" - and then agree to bomb/sanction/drone
any culture that breaks them while leaving other cultures alone. On the other hand, I
also understand universal culture well enough to know that two minutes after the ﬁrst
set of Noahide Laws were established, somebody would propose amending them to
include something about how every culture must protect transgender bathroom rights
or else be cleansed from the face of the Earth by ﬁre and sword. I'm not sure how to
prevent this, or if preventing it is even desirable. This seems like the same question as
the original question, only one meta-level up and without any clear intuition to help
me solve it. I guess this is another reason I continue to be attracted to the idea of
Archipelago.
But I think that none of this makes sense unless we abandon the idea that "universal
culture" and "western culture" are one and the same. I think when Caplan's debate
opponent talked about "protecting Western culture", he was referring to something
genuinely fragile and threatened.
I also think he probably cheated by saying we needed to protect it because it was
responsible for so many great advances, like Coca-Cola and egalitarian gender norms.
I don't think that's fair. I think it's a culture much like Tibetan or Indian culture, pretty
neat in its own way, possibly extra interesting as the ﬁrst culture to learn the art of
summoning entities from beyond the void. Mostly I'm just happy that it exists in the
same way I'm happy that pandas and gorillas exist, a basic delight in the diversity of
the world. I think it can be defended in those terms without having to resolve the
debate on how many of its achievements are truly its own.

The Lizard People Of Alpha Draconis 1
Decided To Build An Ansible
I.
The lizard people of Alpha Draconis 1 decided to build an ansible.
The transmitter was a colossal tower of silksteel, doorless and windowless. Inside were
millions of modular silksteel cubes, each ﬁlled with beetles, a diﬀerent species in
every cube. Big beetles, small beetles, red beetles, blue beetles, friendly beetles,
venomous beetles. There hadn't been a million beetle species on Alpha Draconis I
before the ansible. The lizard people had genetically engineered them, carefully,
lovingly, making each one just diﬀerent enough from all the others. Atop each beetle
colony was a heat lamp. When the heat lamp was on, the beetles crawled up to the
top of the cage, sunning themselves, basking in the glorious glow. When it turned oﬀ,
they huddled together to warmth, chittering out their anger in little infrasonic groans
only they could hear.
The receiver stood on 11845 Nochtli, eighty-ﬁve light years from Alpha Draconis,
toward the galactic rim. It was also made of beetles, a million beetle colonies of the
same million species that made up the transmitter. In each beetle colony was a
pheromone dispenser. When it was on, the beetles would multiply until the whole cage
was covered in them. When it was oﬀ, they would gradually die out until only a few
were left.
Atop each beetle cage was a mouse cage, ﬁlled with a mix of white and grey mice.
The white mice had been genetically engineered to want all levers in the "up"
position, a desire beyond even food or sex in its intensity. The grey mice had been
engineered to want levers in the "down" position, with equal ferocity. The lizard
people had uplifted both strains to full sapience. In each of a million cages, the grey
and white mice would argue whether levers should be up or down - sometimes
through philosophical debate, sometimes through outright wars of extermination.
There was one lever in each mouse cage. It controlled the pheromone dispenser in the
beetle cage just below.
This was all the lizard people of Alpha Draconis 1 needed to construct their ansible.
They had mastered every ﬁeld of science. Physics, mathematics, astronomy,
cosmology. It had been for nothing. There was no way to communicate faster-than-
light. Tachyons didn't exist. Hyperspace didn't exist. Wormholes didn't exist. The light
speed barrier was absolute - if you limited yourself to physics, mathematics,
astronomy, and cosmology.
The lizard people of Alpha Draconis I weren't going to use any of those things. They
were going to build their ansible out of negative average preference utilitarianism.
II.
Utilitarianism is a moral theory claiming that an action is moral if it makes the world a
better place. But what do we mean by "a better place"?

Suppose you decide (as Jeremy Bentham did) that it means increasing the total
amount of happiness in the universe as much as possible - the greatest good for the
greatest number. Then you run into a so-called "repugnant conclusion". The
philosophers quantify happiness into "utils", some arbitrary small unit of happiness.
Suppose your current happiness level is 100 utils. And suppose you could sacriﬁce one
util of happiness to create another person whose total happiness is two utils: they are
only 1/50th as happy as you are. This person seems quite unhappy by our standards.
But crucially, their total happiness is positive; they would (weakly) prefer living to
dying. Maybe we can imagine this as a very poor person in a war-torn Third World
country who is (for now) not actively suicidal.
It would seem morally correct to make this sacriﬁce. After all, you are losing one unit
of happiness to create two units, increasing the total happiness in the universe. In
fact, it would seem morally correct to keep making the sacriﬁce as many times as you
get the opportunity. The end result is that you end up with a happiness of 1 util -
barely above suicidality - and also there are 99 extra barely-not-suicidal people in war-
torn Third World countries.
And the same moral principles that lead you to make the sacriﬁce bind everyone else
alike. So the end result is everyone in the world ends up with the lowest possible
positive amount of happiness, plus there are billions of extra near-suicidal people in
war-torn Third World countries.
This seems abstract, but in some sense it might be the choice on oﬀer if we have to
decide whether to control population growth (thus preserving enough resources to
give everyone a good standard of living), or continue explosive growth so that there
are many more people but not enough resources for any of them to live comfortably.
The so-called "repugnant conclusion" led many philosophers away from "total
utilitarianism" to "average utilitarianism". Here the goal is still to make the world a
better place, but it gets operationalized as "increase the average happiness level per
person". The repugnant conclusion clearly fails at this, so we avoid that particular
trap.
But here we fall into another ambush: wouldn't it be morally correct to kill unhappy
people? This raises average happiness very eﬀectively!
So we make another amendment. We're not in the business of raising happiness, per
se. We're in the business of satisfying preferences. People strongly prefer not to die,
so you can't just kill them. Killing them actively lowers the average number of
satisﬁed preferences.
Philosopher Roger Chao combines these and other reﬁnements of the utilitarian
method into a moral theory he calls negative average preference utilitarianism, which
he considers the ﬁrst system of ethics to avoid all the various traps and pitfalls. It
says: an act is good if it decreases the average number of frustrated preferences per
person.
This doesn't imply we should create miserable people ad nauseum until the whole
world is a Third World slum. It doesn't imply that we should kill everyone who cracks a
frown. It doesn't imply we should murder people for their organs, or never have
children again, or replace everybody with identical copies of themselves, or anything
like that.
It just implies faster-than-light transmission of moral information.

III.
The ansible worked like this:
Each colony of beetles represented a bit of information. In the transmitter on Alpha
Draconis I, the sender would turn the various colonies' heat lamps on or oﬀ, increasing
or decreasing the average utility of the beetles.
In the receiver on 11845 Nochtli, the beetles would be in a constant state of half-light:
warmer than the Draconis beetles if their heat lamp was turned oﬀ, but colder than
them if their heat lamp was turned on. So increasing the population of a certain beetle
species on 11845 Nochtli would be morally good if the heat lamp for that species on
Alpha Draconis were oﬀ, but morally evil otherwise.
The philosophers among the lizard people of Alpha Draconis 1 had realized that this
was true regardless of intervening distance; morality was the only force that
transcended the speed of light. The question was how to detect it. Yes, a change in
the heat lamps on their homeworld would instantly change the moral valence of
pulling a lever on a colony 85 light-years away, but how to detect the morality of an
action?
The answer was: the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice.
Over time, as the great debates of history ebb and sway, evil may not be conquered
completely, but it will lessen. Our own generation isn't perfect, but we have left
behind much of the slavery, bigotry, war and torture, of the past; perhaps our
descendants will be wiser still. And how could this be, if not for some benevolent
general rule, some principle that tomorrow must be brighter than today, and the
march of moral progress slow but inevitable?
Thus the white and grey rats. They would debate, they would argue, they would even
ﬁght - but in the end, moral progress would have its way. If raising the lever and
causing an increase in the beetle population was the right thing to do, then the white
rats would eventually triumph; if lowering the lever and causing the beetle population
to fall was right, then the victory would eventually go to the grey. All of this would be
recorded by a camera watching the mouse colony, and - lo - a bit of information
would have been transmitted.
The ansible of the lizard people of Alpha Draconis 1 was a ﬂop.
They spent a century working on it: ninety years on near-light-speed starships just
transporting the materials, and a decade constructing the receiver according to
meticulous plans. With great fanfare, the Lizard Emperor himself sent the ﬁrst
message from Alpha Draconis I. And it was a total ﬂop.
The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends to justice. But nobody had ever
thought to ask how long, and why. When everyone alike ought to love the good, why
does it take so many years of debate and strife for virtue to triumph over wickedness?
Why do war and slavery and torture persist for century after century, so that only
endless grinding of the wheels of progress can do them any damage at all?
After eighty-ﬁve years of civilizational debate, the grey and white mice in each cage
ﬁnally overcame their diﬀerences and agreed on the right position to put the lever,
just as the mundane lightspeed version of the message from Alpha Draconis reached
11845 Nochtli's radio telescopes. And the lizard people of Alpha Draconis 1 realized
that one can be more precise than simply deﬁning the arc of moral progress as "long".

It's exactly as long as it needs to be to prevent faster-than-light transmission of moral
information.
Fundamental physical limits are a harsh master.

A Modern Myth
1. Eris
A middle-aged man, James, had come on stage believing it was an audition for
American Idol. It wasn't. Out ran his ex-lover, Terri. "You said you loved me!" she said.
"And then when I got pregnant, you disappeared! Twenty years, and you never even
sent me a letter!"
The crowd booed.
As James tried to sputter a response, his wife ran onto the stage. "You cheating jerk!"
she shouted at James. "You lying, cheating jerk! Twenty-ﬁve years we've been
married, and I never..." She picked up a folding chair, tried to swing it at James.
"Stop!" cried James' teenage daughter Katie, joining in the fray. "Mom, Dad, stop it!"
"You stay out of this!" shouted James' wife. "Maybe if you'd had a good male role
model, you wouldn't have become a lesbian."
The crowd gasped.
Katie's girlfriend Lisa came out of a side door. "You take that back!" she yelled. Then
she saw Terri. "Wait? Mom? What are you doing here?"
"That's right," said Alice DiScorria, sidling onto the stage, eﬀortlessly drawing the
audience's attention from the brawl taking shape in front of them. "Katie's girlfriend is
the daughter of the woman her father cheated with, so many years ago. And we've
got the paternity test right here." She theatrically opened a manilla envelope. "And...
James! James is the father!"
"I'VE BEEN LESBIAN LOVERS WITH MY HALF-SISTER!" shrieked Katie.
"This is all your fault!" everyone shouted at everyone else in unison. Then the
punching started.
In short, it had been another successful episode of The Alice Show.
Now Ms. DiScorria was in her dressing room, wiping oﬀ the night's makeup, trying to
decide where to go to dinner. Knock, knock. She opened the door wide.
There stood Katie and Lisa. Katie was holding a shotgun.
"Why would you do this to us?" screamed Katie. "We were a happy family!"
"I loved her!" added Lisa.
"Why?" Katie screamed at her, waving the gun. "WHY?"
"Oh, put it away," said Alice. "We both know you're not going to shoot me. And it
wouldn't hurt me if you did. I do this because I'm Eris, the Greek Goddess of Discord. I
destroy peace. I set people against each other. Then, when their petty ﬁghts destroy
everything they've worked for, I stand over the ruins and laugh. It's my thing. Here.
Have a golden apple."

It appeared in Alice's hand, shining with beauty that deﬁed description. "FOR THE
FAIREST" was writ on the front in letters of liquid light. Katie dropped her gun and
stared. Lisa rubbed her eyes to see if she was dreaming. For a brief moment, no one
moved.
Finally, Katie asked, "You're...giving it to me?"
"Absolutely. To you and your girlfriend. Traditionally, I think it would go to whichever of
you is prettier."
Gently, she placed the golden apple on her dressing table, winked at the girls, and left
the room. She closed the door behind her, so nobody would hear the screams.
2. Ares
"Look," Tom told Ari, "you always seem to come out of this kind of thing okay. So if I
don't make it tomorrow, I want you to give this to my wife." It was an envelope. There
was no address, just 'TO BE OPENED IN THE EVENT OF MY DEATH'.
"Stop talking like that, Tom," said Ari, taking the envelope and putting it into his
backpack. "You'll make it. The Taliban's gonna fold like a wet rag tomorrow, I
promise."
"Easy for you to say. In Helmand, half your squad dies, you just walk out with a big
grin on your face. Kandahar, outnumbered eight to one, and not only do you win, you
end up with two Medals of Honor. I didn't even know you could get more than one
Medal of Honor for a single battle. Yeah, sure, you'll be ﬁne tomorrow. The rest of us,
we're only mortal."
"Yeah," said Ari. "I can see how that would suck."
"Look, you're doing me a big favor, taking that envelope," said Tom. "Anything I can
do for you? You know, in case the worst happens?"
"Nah, don't worry about it."
"There's nobody back home you care about? Wife? Girlfriend? Family?"
"Fuck all. No wife, no girlfriend, and a family dysfunctional like you wouldn't believe."
"Where are you even from, Ari? You never talk about it."
"Who cares?"
"I care. Heck, half the squad thinks you're some kind of government supersoldier, the
other half thinks you should be in a loony bin. You're interesting, Ari."
"Well, ﬁne. I'm Ares, Greek god of war. I'm the son of Zeus and his sister Hera, and let
me tell you, marrying your sister works about as well as you'd expect. I used to be a
big deal, shape the destiny of whole nations, rise of Rome and all that. Then my power
crashed along with everyone else's. Man, I don't even remember the Dark Ages. The
whole medieval era is a blur. By the time I start feeling like myself again, it's the
Renaissance and everybody's ﬁghting with muskets. Nowadays...man. I can ﬁght
better than you mortals, you gotta give me that. But in terms of god stuﬀ...I
remember when I could make all of fucking Persia ﬂee in abject surrender. Now I'm
stuck taking pot shots at Taliban assholes. Meanwhile, they're all shouting about Allah,

and you guys are all shouting about Jesus, and nobody even fucking believes in me
anymore."
"I believe you," said Tom.
"Really?"
"Yeah," said Tom. "In Kandahar, I saw a bullet pass right through you. How would a
government super-soldier manage that? Sure. You're Ares, god of war. I'll worship you,
if you want."
"What fucking good would that be?"
"Think about it! You said that you and all the other gods lost your power back in
Roman days. What happened in Roman days? Constantine! The start of Christianity!
That must have been what did it! Gods' power comes from people believing in them!"
"Why does every mortal always ﬁgure that gods' power comes from people believing
in them? Like you're all some kind of god power experts? Do they teach that to baby
mortals in their little mortal schools? Stupidest thing I ever heard. You think we ruled
the world for a thousand years and didn't check where our power came from? We
ﬁgured that out a long time ago. Divine power comes from meat."
"Meat?"
"Yeah. Like, you know, sacriﬁce a ram to Ares, pray for victory, then eat it in a big
communal feast in the barracks. The more meat sacriﬁced in a god's name, the
stronger he got."
"But then it's still about belief. People stopped believing in you, so they stopped
sacriﬁcing rams to you."
"You've got it ass-backwards. We were at the height of our power. People were
sacriﬁcing rams to us right and left. Then it stopped working. One year the meat
started having a little less eﬀect. The next year it was a little less than that. Eventually
it was gone. And then when the gods became powerless, the cults collapsed, and then
the Christians and Muslims and all the rest stepped in to ﬁll the gap."
"So what can I do? There's some meat in the mess hall, I can sacriﬁce that for you if
you want."
"I'm telling you, it won't work. The power's gone. It's been gone for two thousand
years. Me - and all the rest - we're stuck like this. Some kind of natural ﬂoor to our
power, still more than mortal but forever less than divine. It's fucking awful and I hate
it. I hate not being able to smite whole nations when I'm angry. I hate having to take
commands from 'superior oﬃcers' because I'm 'just a grunt'. And most of all, I hate
that people have forgotten about us. We used to be big, Tom!"
"People haven't forgotten. They love you guys. There's still, you know, Hermes
handbags, and Athena mineral water, and, you know, Mars bars...."
"I am the lord over war, the manslaughtering one, the bloodstained one, he of many
devices, bringer of much weeping, destroyer of men. I AM NOT A FUCKING
CHOCOLATE BAR."

"Sorry, man. I was just saying..."
"I know. You wanted to make me feel better. That's what I've come to. Having to be
consoled by mortals. You know what's going to make me feel better, Tom? Killing some
fucking Taliban tomorrow."
"Yeah. Okay."
"Look, I'm sorry, I didn't meant to..."
"It's not that. But, uh, Ari. We've got a big battle coming up tomorrow. And I know this
probably sounds really crazy to you, but humans - praying makes us feel better.
That's why we do it all the time. To Jesus or Allah or whoever. And we don't really
expect it to work, so...um..."
"Out with it, Tom."
"...is it okay if I pray to you tomorrow?"
"Knock yourself out, Tom."
3. Apollo
Ianthe had always liked magic squares. They were one of the oldest forms of magic. A
Sator square had been found scrawled on one of the walls of Pompeii. Since then the
art had advanced, and she was its master. She would ﬁll the word square with words
relating to the sun, and Apollo would appear before her. Working with gold ink, she
traced the letters carefully:
C I R C L E
I C A R U S
R A R E S T
C R E A T E
L U S T R E
E S T E E M
Apollo appeared before her, devilishly handsome, impeccably well-dressed, unfailingly
polite. He'd told her once that in his other identity, he was a professor at some college
somewhere. She could believe it.
"Ianthe, my daughter," he said, his voice smooth and golden. He always called her
that, even when he was doing very un-fatherly things to her. Though come to think of
it, in his family that might not be such a jarring contradiction. She wondered if he'd
known Oedipus.
"Lord Apollo," she said. "I have called you here to request a boon."
His face fell. He had explained the ﬁrst time he met her that his powers were weak.
That he couldn't help her the way she might have wished. Couldn't grant her wealth
or wisdom or prophecy the way he might have in days of old. Since then she had
never asked him for anything but himself.
"It's...nothing too diﬃcult," she assured him. "Just...actually, I wanted to say good-
bye."
"Good-bye?" asked Apollo.

"There's...someone's hunting us. The neopagan community. I told you about Megan,
right? The girl who used to run a traditionalist group up in Santa Cruz? They found her
dead two weeks ago. There's a Wiccan circle over in Oakland that deals with Greek
themes sometimes; two of their leaders have been missing since January. And then
Aristopsychus the Wise...that's what he calls himself, seriously, one of the crazy sorts
who attacks people drinking Athena Mineral Water and says they're profaning the
name of a goddess...I just got a call. His head was bashed in last night. I'm really
afraid, Lord Apollo."
He looked at her, his face inﬁnitely wise and sorrowful, and she knew he could do
nothing.
"That's why I'm leaving here," she said. "I haven't told anybody, nobody else in the
neopagan community, not even that weird girl Emily who thinks she's my 'acolyte'.
I'm shutting down the temple and going somewhere really far away where nobody can
ﬁnd me, and I don't know when I'll be able to summon you again."
"I understand," said Apollo. "May good fortune go with you."
"But I was asking you for a boon. I need you to take something from me." She took
out a paper bag and produced an apple, brilliant gold, shining with an unearthly
radiance. Apollo stepped back as if someone had struck him, his calm manner broken
for the ﬁrst time Ianthe had seen.
"Where did you get that...that thing?" asked Apollo.
"A detective gave it to me! He was investigating a crime scene. These two girls
murdered each other in a Hollywood studio dressing room...it was all over the news.
And this guy was called in to investigate the crime scene, and all he could ﬁnd was
this golden apple that said "for the fairest". And after all the legal things were closed
he didn't want to throw it out, because it looked so pretty, and he heard about our
temple here, and he ﬁgured it looked like something a Greek pagan revivalist
movement should own, so he gave it to me. And as soon as I saw it...this sounds so
bad, but I didn't tell any of the others, not even Emily. I brought it home and never
told anyone about it. But I'm scared, Apollo. I'm scared it has something to do with the
reason all this is happening. I don't want to leave it here and I don't want to take it
with me, so...please, just take the apple. Before it makes me change my mind!" She
wasn't looking at it; she was carefully avoiding looking at it.
"I can't," said Apollo.
"You have to!" said Ianthe.
"No, I mean, literally, I can't," said Apollo. "The apple has to belong to a woman. Any
woman who sees the apple, she wants it more than she's ever wanted anything else.
Any man who sees it, no eﬀect. Even if a man gets it, he feels compelled to give it to a
woman. That must have been what happened to your detective. I really, really do not
want that apple. You have no idea how bad things get around one of these."
With a grunt and an eﬀort of will, Ianthe threw the golden apple at Apollo's face. He
caught it in his hand reﬂexively, involuntarily. "Take it!" she said, as he stared at his
unwanted prize. "You're a god! I'm sure you can think of a woman who can keep it
safe for you!"

"Ohhhhh....this is not good," Apollo said, through clenched teeth. "I hate these things,
I hate these things, I hate these things, I hate these things..."
Ianthe erased a letter from the middle of the magic square, and Apollo disappeared.
Then she picked up her suitcase, got in her car, and started driving, intent on putting
as much distance as possible between herself and anywhere people would be looking
for her.
4. Aphrodite
She stays by the sea shore. Shining shells and soft surf sounds surround her shelter.
Cythera simmers with summer, and seals swim in the sun. Songbirds circle in the
sapphire sky, and sea stars sit semi-submerged in the sand.
Ares wades out to the cliﬀ where he knows he'll ﬁnd her, a cliﬀ of soft pink rock that
looks like any other on this side of the island. On a little depression in the rock which
only he can see, he traces letters with his ﬁngers:
M O A N
O N C E
A C M E
N E E D
The cliﬀ opens around him, and he is in the bower of Aphrodite.
She is naked. Her body glistens with sea-foam. She is behind a glass shelf ﬁlled with
seashells, and from where Ares is standing, two of them perfectly cover her breasts.
On the near wall are pictures of her family: her husband, Hephaestus; her son, Eros;
her parents, the sea and the blood of Uranus; her nth-great-grandson, Julius Caesar.
On the far wall is a banner reading "UNDEFEATED GOLDEN APPLE WINNER, 1200 BC -
PRESENT", and several oak barrels overﬂowing with golden apples that cast an
unearthly glow all over the room.
"Hello, sexy," she says.
He tries to play it cool, act natural. "Hey Aph," he says. "Just dropping by."
There is no sign of her husband.
"Come on, Ares. You never 'drop by'. What is it really?"
"Um," says Ares. He is acutely aware of the god-sized erection he probably has right
now. He keeps his eyes ﬁxed on the barrels of golden apples, so as not to stare. "Um,"
he says again.
"I heard about what happened in Kandahar," she said. "That was very heroic of you."
She gently brushed her arm against his.
"Um," said Ares. "That's...kind of...look. This soldier guy I knew. He asked me if...if
there was anyone back home I cared for. And I said no. Fuck everyone. You know.
Mom, Dad, fuck them all. But then I started thinking. We had something good. A long
time ago. And I was thinking, maybe..."
"But Ares," she said, biting her lip, "you know I'm married."

"You were married the last ﬁve times too," Ares said, forcefully now. "It's kind of a big
part of having an aﬀair."
"But," she said, running a hand through her golden hair, "what if people found out?"
"People found out the last ﬁve times too," he said. "Nobody thought anything of it.
You're the goddess of love. Of lust. Love and lust. Of course you have aﬀairs."
"What if my parents knew? It would break their heart."
"Your parents are the sea, and the blood that came out of a guy's scrotum when my
grandfather castrated him. I think they'll be ﬁne."
"Oh, Ares. You know so much about me."
She pulled him closer. She closed her eyes. His lips touched hers. Then -
"We can't do this, Ares. We're just too diﬀerent, you and I. Love. War. It wouldn't
work."
"We are not diﬀerent. All's fair in both of us, for one thing. We're both, uh,
relationships between two parties. Often involving ﬁghting. More fun when you're high
testosterone. And when you've got a big spear."
"I love it when you talk dirty to me, Ares," said Aphrodite, and put her hand around his
waist. He tried to kiss her a second time.
"No," she said suddenly. "I can't. What about the children?"
"Your child is Eros!" protested Ares. "How is that a problem?!"
"Show me you care," said Aphrodite.
"I care!" said Ares. "I promise you, I care. Tom - this soldier I know - he was telling me
all about his wife, and how much he loved her, and I was thinking, I need something
like that, and then I remembered - I've got that. You're the one for me. You're the only
one I want. I promise."
"Show me," said Aphrodite.
"How?" asked Ares. "What can I do to show you that I care?"
Aphrodite let her hand linger on his shoulder, then walked to the other side of the
room. She picked up a golden apple.
"There's another golden apple in the world now," she said. "I can feel it, Ares. That
apple is mine by right." For a second, all the softness disappeared from her face, and
he knew why one of her epithets was 'the warlike one'. "I want that apple, Ares. Bring
it to me."
"But baby, you already have like a million golden apples. Look, you've got barrels full
of them. You're not even using - " He picked up a golden apple that had fallen behind
one the barrels.
"It's the principle of the thing, Ares. It says 'for the fairest'. Am I not the fairest? Have I
not been the most beautiful of goddess and women since before Paris was a glimpse

in his mother's eye? Somebody else has my magic apple, Ares, and I am literally
shaking here. You are my protector, the hero of Kandahar, the man who got two
Medals of Honor in the same battle. Can you rescue me?" She knelt before him. There
were tears coming out of her eyes. She hugged his leg.
"I'll...I'll get you your apple, Aph. I'll ﬁnd whoever's got your golden apple, and if they
don't give it back, I'll..." He took out his sword and swung it above him, so fast that it
whistled in the air like the note of a lute.
"I'll be waiting for you..." whispered Aphrodite.
Ares turned to go. The cliﬀ face opened in front of him. The birds were still singing,
and dolphins leapt for joy in the melodious waves. He was kind of a chump, but he
knew this was the way of things, and it would never change.
"...I won't be wearing any clothes." Aphrodite called after him.
5. Hermes
He is called Herman. He runs a hedge fund. He lives in Manhattan. He wears nice
suits.
Today he is in a nice suit, but he is not in Manhattan. He is in Memphis, Tennessee. Not
even the nice part of Memphis, Tennessee. He's in a poor, crime-ridden ghetto in
Memphis Tennessee, and it has a bridge, and he is underneath it.
He spots a big man sleeping underneath the bridge, wrapped in a ratty blanket. His
beard is unkempt, and even from far away, he smells like alcohol.
"Hi Dad", said Hermes.
"Whaddyawant?" mumbled Zeus.
"It's me, Dad," said Hermes. "Hermes."
With some eﬀort, Zeus brought himself into a sitting position, brushed some of the
more egregious twigs out of his beard. He rubbed his eyes.
"Yeah, so? Whaddyawant?"
Hermes inspected the King of Gods and Men. He was streaked with dirt. He was
dressed in a fading white wife-beater, with reddish stains that Hermes hoped were
wine.
"I've been looking all over for you, Dad. You look terrible. What happened to you?"
"Whaddyoucare?"
"You used to be King, Dad!"
"I'm still king. Iduncarewhatchy'all think."
"But what happened to you? I talked to Ares the other day. He won two Medals of
Honor, did you hear? Apollo's got tenure at Oxford. I'm the god of commerce and
crime, so of course I've got a hedge fund. But you? What happened to you?"

"Fucking child support payments!" said Zeus. "I was doin' just ﬁne for myself until
cops from forty-seven diﬀerent states came my front door calling me a deadbeat
dad!"
"Oh dear," said Hermes. "Forty-seven women?"
"Forty-seven states," said Zeus. "Hundred ninety women. Two hundred ﬁve kids.
Fucking mess."
"A hundred ninety women," mused Hermes. "Please tell me you didn't turn all of them
into animals."
"Are you fucking kink-shaming me?" said Zeus. "If I get oﬀ on having kids with women
and then turning 'em into animals, that's my private business. Ain't no weirder than
Ganymede being gay or your kid who's a futa or...BLAAAAAARGH". He turned and
vomited the morning's meal into the river. "Besides, I don't got power anymore. Can't
even turn a pretty girl into an ape these days, forgeddabout a cow or a bear."
"Look, sorry for bringing up your fetish," said Hermes. "I didn't know it was a sore
point. I wanted to talk about something important. Dad, I've ﬁgured it all out."
"You ﬁggered what out?"
"All of it. What happened to us. Why we lost our power. And how we're going to get it
back."
"Yeah?" said Zeus. He sounded skeptical. "I'm listenin'"
"Look," said Hermes. "How did we used to get power? Animal sacriﬁce. And which
animal? Rams. What astrological age was it? The Age of Aries, the sign of The ram.
2000 BC to 1 AD, or thereabouts. Then the age changes. The sun is in Pisces. Sign of
the ﬁsh. Boom. Sacriﬁcing rams no longer works. Who comes out on top? Some Israeli
whose followers are all ﬁshermen. Talk about being in the right place at the right
time."
"So yer saying, we need to get the mortals to sacriﬁce ﬁsh to us now, and then we're
back in business?"
"No. Because the Age of Pisces ended last century. Now it's the Age of Aquarius. The
Water Bearer."
"So sacriﬁce water?"
"Well, this is where we start to have a problem. I know you have trouble remembering
all your children, but perhaps you recall that a few thousand years ago, you had a
daughter who happened to become the Goddess Of Wisdom, Intelligence, and
Cleverness?"
"Never gonna forget that one," said Zeus, rubbing his head.
"It would seem that my lovely and not-at-all-incredibly-annoying sister Athena ﬁgured
all of this out about ten years before I did," said Hermes. He reached into his pocket
and took out a bottle of Athena Mineral Water. "Behold! 91% market share. Aquaﬁna?
Bankrupt. Dasani? Out of business. And here's the best part." He held the label up
very close, so Zeus could read it. "Athena Mineral Water Customer Reward Program,"

it said in small font. "Every time you drink a refreshing bottle of Athena Mineral Water,
say 'Thanks, Athena!' in front of a registered associate, and they'll punch your card.
Collect ten punches and get a liter bottle of Athena Mineral Water absolutely free."
"Whaddya sayin'?" asked Zeus.
"I'm saying that every day, about a million mortals are going into supermarkets,
drinking water, and saying 'Thanks, Athena!', and each one of them is giving my
beloved-and-not-at-all-aneurysm-inducing sister an amount of divine power equal to
an entire animal sacriﬁce. I had some of my quants crunch the numbers, and right
now I'm guessing she's about twenty times more powerful than you were at your
prime. At your prime, Dad. She pretty much has a monopoly on divinity right now.
We're really really really screwed."
"So you gonna take all that cash you got and open up your own water business?"
"I tried. They wouldn't even let me register it. Said it was a trademark conﬂict with
Hermes Handbags. I got my lawyers to look up who owns Hermes Handbags, and it's a
shell corporation belonging to a consortium belonging to a Chinese group belonging to
a company registered in the Cayman Islands which was set up using money from...
Athena Mineral Water. Mars Bars, same thing. Zeus Cameras, likewise. And it's worse
than that. I try to ﬁnd some neopagan groups, see if maybe I can get them to sacriﬁce
a few bottles of water to me just until I can think of a solution that scales. She
murdered all of them. In cold blood. Every priest or priestess who ever worshipped
another Olympian. She's boxed us in, Dad."
"And that's why yer comin' to me. You want....the power of lighning!"
Zeus tried to stand in an imposing pose, but only succeeded in tripping on his blanket
and crumpling back onto the ground.
"Dad, you can't summon lightning anymore. You haven't had that kind of strength for
two millennia. And with the power Athena's collected, it wouldn't help. But there is
something you can give me."
"What?"
"I need to talk to Prometheus."
Zeus managed to bring himself into an approximation of standing. "Now listen here,
sonny. Maybe I ain't much of a king of the gods anymore. I ain't got the lightning and
the thunder and all that. But lockin' that bastard up was the best thing I ever did, and
you know it, and yer not gonna take that away from me. You think yer so smart with
your hedge fund, and yer money, and yer fancy East Coast suit, but I'm tellin' you,
Prometheus would eat you for breakfast and he wouldn't even break out a sweat."
"Right, Dad. That's the thing. He's the only one who's smart enough to outmanuever
Athena. I'm proud of my brains, but she's the Goddess Of Wisdom, Intelligence, and
Cleverness, plus now she's stronger than us, and I'm not sure how to get one up on
the Goddess of Wisdom, Intelligence, and Cleverness without help from someone
who's...uh...very very smart."
"Prometheus ain't just smart," spat Zeus. "It's not just that he has book-larning. He's
the God of Foresight. He sees every possible future laid out in fronna him as easily as
you or I see that there blanket." He pointed to the blanket, which was actually so dirt-

covered that it was getting hard to see against the dirt below. "It took all of us
together, and all the Giants, and all the Cyclopses to bring him down, and we
wouldn'ta succeeded if the Fates themselves hadn't gotten pissed with him for ruining
their weaving and given us a hand. And it was Athena herself who told us that we had
to bind him somewhere far away, couldn't talk to him, couldn't even go near him, or
else he'd ﬁgure out some way to screw up all our futures just by sayin' a couple a'
sentences to us. And all a' you, and all the Giants, and all the Cyclopses, you all
agreed, and you all gave me the key that lets you reach him, and I ain't given that key
to anyone in the past two thousand years and I ain't givin' it to you now and that's
ﬁnal, you hear me, boy?"
"Then," said Hermes, "I fear we are all doomed."
"We're fucking gods," said Zeus. "We can't die. We can't even be contained, for long.
Only gods we ever managed to lock up were the Titans in Tartarus and Prometheus in
Elbrus, and that was only by all of us workin' together, and by my power as King of
Gods, and if you think I'm signin' oﬀ to any of this, yer crazy."
"Then we will wane," said Hermes, "and become little better than bugs skittering
beneath Athena's feet."
"I ain't got much," said Zeus, "but I beat Prometheus and no one ain't ever going to
take that away from me. Now get going, sonny boy."
"If I do not beat Athena," said Hermes, "you'll never be able to turn any women into
animals, ever again."
Zeus paused, just a second, then spat. "I made my choice," he told Hermes. "Now
git!"
6. Pandora
He remembered the ﬁrst time he had come here to see her. It had taken him months
just to ﬁnd the place. An Orthodox convent. Our Lady Of Sorrows, just outside Kiev.
He had knocked on her door. "Come in," she'd said. She hadn't opened the door. At
the time, he hadn't realized that was signiﬁcant.
She was wearing a veil. "Dory?" he asked. She nodded slightly. "Dory, it's Apollo."
"You didn't forget about me." He couldn't see her eyes, but she was smiling.
"Forget about you? Dory, I've been sending you care packages every month!"
"Oh." A frown. "I'm sorry. I didn't...I don't open things."
"Oh."
"You understand, don't you?"
"I can see how it would be traumatic. But...you didn't get any of my letters?"
"They were in envelopes, Apollo. I told you, I don't open things."
"Oh," he said. He lifted her veil, saw her face for the ﬁrst time in years. "What, not
even your eyes?"

Pandora nodded.
"The church is beautiful. It looks like a wedding cake. You haven't even been a little
curious what the convent you're living in looks like?"
"I don't do curiosity anymore, Apollo. Curiosity leads me to bad, bad places."
"Dory." It was worse than he'd thought. He was the god of healing, or had been. His
powers were weak, but maybe he could at least do some therapy? "Dory, you did one
bad thing."
"I did all the bad things, Apollo. Literally. Every single one of them."
"Okay. Be that as it may. You were tricked. Zeus played a horrible joke on you. Or he
used you as a pawn to play a horrible joke on everybody. It doesn't mean opening
things is always bad, or that curiosity always gets punished. It means one stupid god
played one stupid joke. Look, he could have put all the world's evils in, I don't know,
his basement, and released them if and only if you didn't open a box. Then the lesson
would have been to always open things. Do you see how that makes just as much
sense as what actually happened."
"I'm sorry, Apollo," said Pandora. "I appreciate what you're trying to do. But it won't
help."
"It might!" said Apollo. "Keep an open mind!"
"I don't do open."
"Ah. Right."
He sat down on the little cot. She sat down beside him.
"So now you're a nun."
"I just live here. I wandered by one day, and the sisters took me in. Said I looked like I
needed help, which I guess I did. I've stayed here ever since. They say that I'm good
luck to have around. Can you believe that? Me? Good luck?"
"They like you," said Apollo. "Anyone would."
"It's because I don't age," said Pandora. "And because I never leave my room. They
assume I'm a saint or something. Praying all the time. I'm even starting to get
pilgrims, if you can believe it." She waved her hand towards a table full of little
knickknacks. "Gifts. The pilgrims give me gifts." She sighed.
Apollo went over to the table. A rosary. An icon, covered in gold leaf. Jesus, he
assumed. A vial of holy water. "This is lovely," he said, looking more closely at the
icon. "Who gave it to you?"
"I didn't ask," said Pandora. "I don't do curiosity."
"Ah," said Apollo. He took her hand again. "Come outside with me. I won't make you
open your eyes. I'll lead the way. Just for a minute?"
They walked through the courtyard. A few nuns looked askance at them, but Apollo
looked too poised to be anywhere other than where he was supposed to be, and they

assumed he was a visiting priest or somebody and let him pass. They came to a
meadow. Apollo gingerly guided Pandora to sit down on a rock, and sat beside her.
"We used to have a good thing going," he told her.
"And now I'm like this," she said.
"You might get better. With time."
"I might not."
"There's always hope."
"Yes, they say I closed the box just in time for that one. Strange how little I've gotten
from it myself."
"Kiss me," said Apollo, on impulse.
"We had a good thing going once," Pandora said. "That's not me anymore."
"It could be," said Apollo. "Hope, and all that."
"I don't open things," said Pandora. "Not even my heart."
How many centuries ago had that been? Three? Four? They all blended together. The
convent was no help either. Most places had the decency to change a little since the
Renaissance. The convent looked exactly the same. Same meadow. Same courtyard.
Same door. Apollo knocked. "It's me, Dory."
"Come in," she said, without opening the door.
He came in, sat down on the cot. She looked the same, too. She was in a strange
middle state; a human created before mortality, given all the divine gifts, to be the
wife of a god. She wasn't divine, not quite. But she wasn't fully mortal either. A
demigod, maybe.
"It's been a while," he said. "Five, ten years?"
"It's been a while," agreed Pandora.
The room hadn't changed either, except for a few more pilgrim gifts. The rosary and
Jesus-icon had been joined by enough little saints and angels to ﬁll a heavenly choir,
plus a good-sized marble statue of an woman in armor. He tried to remember if there
was some female warrior-saint, but his mind came up blank. He wished he could ask
Pandora, but he knew what she thought of curiosity.
"I brought you a present," he said. "It's a smartphone. Flip phones are on their way
out. This one works without being opened."
Pandora ran her hands along it. "It's so smooth," she said. "Now you can call me any
time?"
"Yeah," said Apollo. "You can call people too. If you ever feel, you know, the need to
connect."
Pandora gave him a little peck on the cheek, then slipped the phone under her bed.

"I wish I could say this was entirely a social call," said the god, "but I'm here on
business."
There was a pause in the conversation before he realized she wasn't going to ask
what the business was.
"A friend gave me something dangerous. And I have to give it to a woman. But if the
woman saw it, bad things would happen. Really, really bad things. And I asked myself,
where can I ﬁnd a woman who will listen when I warn her not to look at something?
And, uh. I thought of you."
"Sure," said Pandora. "I'm happy to take your thing. Where shall I put it?"
"Uh," said Apollo. "Somewhere where the pilgrims won't see it. That's important.
Nobody can see it."
"I'll put it under my bed," said Pandora.
Apollo handed it to her. It was heavy, and cold to the touch, and round, about the size
of a baseball. She slipped it under the little cot.
"Thanks," said Apollo.
"I'm glad I could help you with something," said Pandora. "You've been so nice to
me."
"I haven't been! I never visit!"
"You visit sometimes. The others never visit. They wish they could forget about me."
"Um," said Apollo. "I'm sure they meant to drop by and tell you how they're doing."
"It's okay," said Pandora. "It doesn't matter whether I know how they're doing or not."
Apollo frowned. "Listen. I know you have your position in the pantheon, as Cautionary
Tale Against The Dangers Of Excessive Curiosity. But I have my place too. Well, lots of
places. The Sun. Healing. Music. Poetry. Being Very Handsome. But along with all
those things, I'm the God Of Reason And Science. And maybe a long time ago,
curiosity caused all the world's problems. But now it's the other way around.
Curiosity's solving problems, Pandora. All over the world, curiosity is solving famine,
it's solving poverty, it's solving disease. They put smallpox back in the box, Pandora!"
"Wait," said Pandora. "I never heard about that! They found a way to...?"
For a brief moment, Apollo thought Pandora was going to ask a question, but she
caught herself. He answered anyway.
"Yes," he said. "There's a way to put things back in the box. Maybe. A little.
Sometimes. It's really hard. So hard I wouldn't have been able to do it myself, and I'm
the God of Healing. But they did it. Once. Maybe they'll be able to do it again. And
they did it because of curiosity. They wondered whether they could do it, and then
they wondered how they could do it, and then they did it."
"That's...really interesting," said Pandora.
"You'll think about that?" asked Apollo.

"I will," said Pandora.
"And maybe...call somebody sometime? Me? Someone else? Anybody? I know Artemis
has been wanting to hear from you."
"Um," said Pandora. "Maybe? I don't know."
"That's ﬁne. Just...keep the option open."
"Apollo, I don't do open."
"Just keep it in mind."
"Goodbye, Apollo."
"Goodbye, Dory."
7. Athena
"Hi. My name is Ari...Smith...and I'm here to see Ms...I don't know, she probably goes
by Tina or Minnie or something like that. Really smart and mysterious and probably in
charge of everything?"
The security guard at the entrance to the Athena Mineral Water Tower looked at him
skeptically. "Do you have an appointment?"
Ares reached into his pocket.
"I got my fucking appointment right here! Two Medals of Honor! While you guys were
selling water to yuppies, I was risking my life for your freedom over in Afghanistan.
Come on, man. Can't a vet get any respect around here?"
The guard shook his head. "Can't get in without an appointment," he said.
"So," said Ares, "it has come to this. Same as always." A bronze spear appeared in his
hand, and he rammed it right through the security guard. Didn't even bother
extracting it, there was more where that came from. Somebody screamed. An alarm
sounded. Whistling, Ares walked through the lobby and into the elevator, pressed the
button for the top ﬂoor. That was where important people had their oﬃces, right?
Apparently it wasn't. "Excuse me," Ares asked some kind of secretary sitting at a
desk. "Can you direct me to Ms...I don't know, she probably goes by Tina or Minnie or
something like that? Really smart and mysterious and probably in charge of
everything?"
A few policemen ran up behind him and started to open ﬁre. Without even looking at
them, Ares chucked a spear backwards and somehow managed to impale all three of
them at once. The secretary stared at him, eyes wide with horror.
"Damn. I didn't mean to get you all frazzled. Uh, look. Two Medals of Honor! I'm a vet!
Patriotic, trustworthy! Ms. Tina or Minnie or something? Really smart and important?
Please?"
"Uh..." The secretary looked terriﬁed, but at least it was the sort of terror that scared
her into talking. "Uh, you mean the CEO? Ms. Athena?"

"Really? She's the fucking Goddess of Wisdom And Intelligence And Cleverness and
she couldn't get a better pseudonym than 'Ms. Athena'? Whatever. Where is she?"
Another elevator ride and a few more cops later, Ares found himself breaking down
the door of the CEO's oﬃce.
"Hey," said Ares. "Long time, no see."
"Can't imagine why," said Athena.
"Look, I'll be blunt," said Ares. "I came here to get the golden apple. Give me that and
we're square. I'll go away. I'll even pay for the doors. And, uh...everything."
"What golden apple?"
"Oh, come on. I talked to Aphrodite the other day. She said there's a new golden apple
about. She doesn't have it. And I talked to Hera. She doesn't have it. And I thought...
who's been gunning for a golden apple ever since that whole mess with Troy? Who's
the Goddess Of Wisdom And Intelligence And Cleverness and always gets everything
she wants? And then I remembered my wonderful older sister who I deﬁnitely don't
think is the most annoying person ever, and who seems to be doing pretty well for
herself. And I thought maybe I should come pay you a visit. Great water, by the way. I
tried some on my way here."
"Fact is," said Athena, "I don't have any golden apples."
"Oh, lay oﬀ it, we both know you've got the damn apple. Give it to me or else I'll
smash this place up however much it takes to ﬁnd it."
About a dozen SWAT oﬃcers burst into the oﬃce. "Ms. Athena! There's an intruder in
the building!"
"It's taken care of," said Athena. "Go oﬀ and have a nice day."
The SWAT team left.
"They believe you?" asked Ares, who was about seven feet tall, dressed in Trojan War
vintage armor, carrying a huge bronze spear still covered in blood, and clearly visible.
"I've...put a glamour upon myself," said Athena. "It helps a lot, working with mortals.
As long as I'm around, nobody notices anything unusual."
"And you didn't even want their help?" asked Ares. "Even though you're alone, with
your younger brother, who happens to be unbeatable in combat?"
Athena laughed. "Unbeatable? Ares, you have no idea what you've just walked into. I
understand Hermes has ﬁgured it out, which means I'll have to take care of him
sooner rather than later. But you? You waltz in here, expecting me to be a pushover?
Let me show you the tiniest taste of what I can do."
She opened the window. She stretched out her hand. A bolt of lightning arced from her
ﬁngers, struck the street below.
"Lightning?" asked Ares. "But...only Dad could call lightning!"
"Not anymore," said Athena. "Come on, Ares. You want to ﬁght? Let's ﬁght."

Ares threw his spear. It stopped in midair, like it had hit an invisible wall. Then it
turned, ﬂew back at him, coiled around like a snake, tied him down. "Hey!" he
protested. "Hey! That's not fair!"
"I'm so glad you came," said Athena. "I needed a test subject. To see if my powers
were really as strong as I hoped. What's the hardest thing in the world, Ares? Binding
a god. Only ever accomplished twice in history. The Titans. Prometheus. Both times,
by the power of Zeus and all the other gods combined. Do I dare attempt such a thing
alone? I believe I do."
The lights darkened. The air began to stir. Lightning arced back and forth across the
room. A secretary opened the door, saw the chaos, said "Oh, looks like you're busy,"
closed the door, and walked out. Time seemed to stop.
There was a rush, a whistle, and a thud, and then Ares wasn't in the world anymore.
8. Prometheus
"Are we there yet?" asked Heracles.
"When we are there," said Hermes, "I promise I will tell you."
"It's just that I was wondering," said Heracles, "whether we were there."
"There are," said Hermes, "certain games mortals play, in which a necessary
prerequisite is to create your own hero character. And in some of those games, you
get a certain amount of points, which you are allowed to allocate either to intelligence
or to strength, so that the smarter you are, the weaker you must be, and vice versa.
And I notice, Heracles, that you are the strongest man who has ever existed. Do you
know what that implies?"
"It implies that I'm very strong," said Heracles. "But also, I was wondering - are we
there yet?"
Hermes sighed. They were in the former Soviet Republic of Georgia driving down a dirt
road in a narrow Caucasus mountain pass. It would have been unpleasant for several
reasons even without his companion's endless whining. Still, he was feeling just a little
bit euphoric.
One week ago, Ares had attacked Athena, raving about golden apples, and then...
nothing. He had disappeared. He'd asked his girlfriend Tyche to ﬁnd him. Tyche was
the goddess of luck - a nice catch, if you ran a hedge fund. She could ﬁnd anything.
But she couldn't ﬁnd Ares. He wasn't in the world. There was only one other place he
could be.
Tartarus. The Pit. The Abyss. The place beyond space where those removed from the
world languished in darkness for eternity.
He'd gotten on the ﬁrst ﬂight to Memphis, shaken his father awake. Drunk as he was,
Zeus had understood immediately. If Athena had gained enough power to open
Tartarus, any one of them could be next. Their very souls were in danger.
And after a lot of arguing and screaming, Hermes had changed tactics and brought
out some wine, and he had gotten Zeus very, very drunk. And whether it was one of

those things, or another, or the combination of all of them, Zeus had divulged the key
to Mt. Elbrus, the one that accessed the secret prison of Prometheus.
"We're here," Hermes told Heracles. He parked the car in a bed of gravel by the side
of the road. They were in a narrow deﬁle. Mt. Elbrus - the mortal one, the one visible
to humans - loomed in front of them. In the rock face to their left, there was an
opening just narrow enough to ﬁt a single person at at time.
"Now remember," he said, as he turned on his ﬂashlight and squeezed into the cave,
"You're going to be wearing these ear plugs. You'll stare straight ahead, at my back,
nowhere else. You've got the bottle of magic water in your pocket, and..."
"Why do I have to wear the earplugs?" asked Heracles.
"We've gone over this a thousand times," said Hermes. "You have to wear the
earplugs because Prometheus knows literally everything. He knows what he has to
say to scare you, or turn you against me, or make you kill yourself. So you're just
going to wear earplugs and not listen to him."
"And why do I have to stare at your back?"
"Because if you stare at Prometheus, maybe he can inﬂuence you with some kind of
facial expression or hand signal, and then you'll still end up killing yourself. Or killing
me. Or dethroning Zeus and returning the universe to primaeval chaos. Or something
too horrible to even think about."
"Hermes?"
"Yeah?"
"I don't think there's any hand signal that would make me dethrone Zeus and restore
the universe to primaeval chaos."
Hermes sighed.
"Heracles, do you remember when I told you to meet me in the Caucasus Mountains
of Georgia, and I speciﬁcally said former Soviet Republic of, and I speciﬁcally made
you repeat back to me 'former Soviet Republic of', and a few hours later I got a call
from Atlanta International Airport asking me where I was?"
"Yeah."
"So consider the possibility, however remote, that Prometheus might be smarter than
you."
"Oh," said Heracles. "I guess I hadn't thought of that."
They pushed on through the cave, winding around huge stalagmites, stepping over
pools with pale eyeless ﬁsh.
"That's why," Hermes continued, "when we open the secret gate, I am going to talk to
Prometheus, and you are going to wear the earplugs and stare at my back."
"But," asked Heracles, "what if Prometheus tells you to dethrone primaeval chaos or
whatever?"

"Excellent question," said Hermes, "That's why I brought you. I am going to go forth
and talk to Prometheus. I have here a cell phone which is programmed to accept
exactly one hundred characters of input. When Prometheus tells me how to defeat
Athena, I will enter it into the cell phone. When I give you the signal, you will usher me
back into this cave, away from Prometheus. And once we are in the cave, you will give
me this vial of water from the River Lethe, which will cause me to forget everything
that happened in the past eight hours."
"So I'm just here to...give you the water?" asked Heracles, confused.
"It's more complicated than that. If I show the slightest sign of not wanting to drink
that vial of water, then it's your job to overpower me and force it down my throat, all
without allowing me to communicate with you in any way. I trust that you will be able
to manage that?"
"I'm very strong," said Heracles.
"And that," said Hermes, "is why we love you. There is one more thing I'm going to
ask of you. After I've drunk the water from Lethe, but before I wake up, you need to
read the message on the cell phone yourself and conﬁrm that it looks like a strategy
for defeating Athena and not like some other kind of message from Prometheus to the
outside world, and certainly not like any other terms Prometheus has added to our
bargain. If you see something that looks like a message from Prometheus or an extra
term, I need you to smash the cell phone and drink this second vial of water from the
River Lethe."
"Oh good," said Heracles. "I like smashing things and I like water."
"The only problem," said Hermes, "is that you are a couple of ﬁlaments short of a light
bulb. So what I'm going to do is ask you to swear on the River Styx that you'll comply.
You're half-god; that kind of oath is self-enforcing. As long as even the tiniest part of
you remembers what you've sworn to do, it will be literally impossible to do
otherwise."
"All right. I swear by river sticks that I'll do what you say."
"By the RIVER STYX!"
"I swear by the River Styx that I'll do what you say."
The cave brieﬂy darkened, and there was a gust of icy wind that seemed to come from
nowhere.
"Good. Now, put the earplugs in, and be quiet for just a second. I need to concentrate
here."
He searched for a part of the cave wall that was just a little too smooth.
"Hermes?" asked Heracles.
"Yes?" asked Hermes.
Heracles said nothing.
"YES?" asked Hermes.

Heracles still said nothing. Hermes saw that he was wearing the earplugs.
"Hermes, if I have the earplugs in, how will I know if I'm being quiet?"
Hermes gave what he hoped was a reassuring-looking shrug, then went back to
scanning the cave wall.
There.
A little too smooth, a little too pale. Hermes served part-time as God Of Magic, and he
could sense something oﬀ about that part of the cave. He put his hand on it.
Unnatural warmth. The key went here.
With a harpy-feather quill, in ink of ichor, Hermes wrote:
D E T E R
E X I L E
T I T A N
E L A T E
R E N E W
The wall opened, and sunlight shown through.
They climbed out onto a rock promontory. The scene before them both was and wasn't
Mount Elbrus. The snow shone just a little bit brighter. The sunlight glittered just a
little more. The shadows were a little bit darker.
And from under the mountain poked out a gigantic head, four titanic limbs, and bits of
a huge torso. A giant, lying supine, pinned down by the peak. On the right half of the
torso sat a great eagle, taking occasional bites of liver.
"Hello, Hermes," said Prometheus.
Well, no turning back now, thought the god.
"Hello, Prometheus," said Hermes. "With all due respect, I'm trying to minimize
information ﬂow with you, so I'd like you not to speak until I've ﬁnished explaining."
He paused, waiting for an objection, staring at Prometheus even though he knew he
shouldn't. He tried to read the Titan's great bearded face. He looked surprisingly
cheerful for a man pinned underneath a mountain having his liver eternally pecked
out.
Finally, Prometheus nodded.
"We've got a problem, back in the world. Two thousand years ago, the animal
sacriﬁces stopped working. Eventually we ﬁgured out it had to do with the precession
of the zodiac. The source of power went from rams to ﬁsh and now to water. Athena
ﬁgured it out ﬁrst, and now she's got a monopoly on the water industry. She's taken
all of the divine power and become strong enough to send gods to Tartarus. The rest
of us have some residual abilities, but otherwise we're barely beyond mortal level.
We're at a loss, and we were hoping that, um, your special abilities might be able to
help us. So we'd like to oﬀer you a deal. In exchange for information that helps us
defeat Athena, we'll, um, remove the eagle. There's a key...I don't have it here, but it
can be used remotely. We'll do that. And say we're sorry about it. Really sorry."

That they would never free Prometheus went without saying, so Hermes didn't say it.
The Titan still looked alarmingly cheerful.
"You can, uh, talk now, if you want," said Hermes. "Though, maybe try to keep it
short."
"I appreciate the apology," said Prometheus. "Really, I do. And I think we can deal
with each other. Removing the eagle would be great, of course. But there's one more
thing I've got to ask."
This was what he'd been afraid of. He was desperate. Prometheus knew it. Each
additional term was a malignant seed that could grow into anything at all. He would
have to hold fast to his plan and pray it was enough.
"Alas," said Hermes, "We predicted that you might say that, so we've taken some
measures to precommit not to change any of our terms. In particular, I have sworn by
the River Styx - an oath which it is literally impossible for gods to break - that I will
not accept any terms other than the ones I just mentioned. Also, once you give me
your strategic advice, I will be writing down a very short hundred-character summary
on this phone, which is programmed to accept no more than a hundred characters and
will physically melt if any attempt is made to interfere with that programming. Then I
will give a pre-determined hand signal to Heracles, who will escort myself and the
phone back into the cave and the ordinary world and force-feed me a vial of water
from the River Lethe so that any memory of our conversation beyond those hundred
characters will be lost forever. Heracles will then read the cell phone and conﬁrm that
no extra terms have been added to the bargain. If he sees any, he will smash the cell
phone and drink water from Lethe himself. Heracles has himself sworn by the River
Styx to comply with all of this."
Prometheus looked thoughtful - and oh god, were there any three words in the English
language scarier than those - and ﬁnally he said: "Let's discuss my terms. After you
agree to them, I'll tell you how you are going to get around your oath, Heracles,
Heracles' oath, and the water of Lethe."
Hermes sighed.
"My terms are: you'll remove the eagle. And you'll donate $1503.15 to a charity called
'Against Malaria Foundation'."
"Oh no," said Hermes. "Oh no oh no oh no. That is exactly the kind of thing I'm not
going to do. You want me to take an action in the world? A speciﬁc action? With
multiple bits of information? Oh no oh no oh no oh no there is no way you are going to
get me to do that."
Prometheus still looked cheerful. "Well then, Hermes, it was nice to chat. I guess you'll
be on your way."
"Now hold on. You don't want to take an option, presented at zero cost to you, that will
get that eagle out of your liver forever and ever?"
"It's not that I don't want to. It's that bargaining is a game of give-and-take. We both
have things we want out of this interaction. The question is how far we're going to go
to get them. It's a game of bluﬃng and counterbluﬃng. And unfortunately for you, I
am the God Of Foresight, and happen to be omniscient. You are going to walk out of

here in ﬁfty-one minutes having agreed to my terms. All I am doing is speaking the
complicated dance of words that inevitably gets you to that point."
"I hate everything about this place so much," said Hermes.
"And I am deeply sorry," said Prometheus, and he sounded sorry, "but I do insist."
"Why?" asked Hermes. "What are you plotting?"
"You know that I like humans. You remember, I gave them ﬁre, so long ago. I still have
a fond place in my heart for them, and malaria is a terrible disease, and I thought..."
"You're omniscient, so you know I don't believe that for a second. Try again! What are
you doing? What's next on your little list of plans? The humans live on Mount
Olympus, and we have to worship them? The Fates accidentally snip their own ﬁngers
oﬀ and die of blood loss? I know you're up to some kind of unspeakable horror, the
only question is which one?"
"Hermes," asked Prometheus, "has it ever occurred to you that I was out, in the world,
for countless aeons before you imprisoned me here? If you're so afraid of what I can
do or say with a single sentence, what do you think happened when I had millennia to
tailor everything just the way I wanted it? Things are going well for me, aren't they?
The gods have been brought low. Humans have never been doing better. Zeus
thought he was so clever, giving them a box full of evils, but I selected every one of
those evils eons beforehand. You know what was in that box, Hermes? Things to make
humanity stronger. I gave them famine so they would invent agriculture. I gave them
disease so they would invent medicine. I gave them war so they would smelt iron. And
I left them hope, so that even in their darkest moments they would pull through and
keep dreaming. Dream of putting all of those evils back in the box they came from
and closing it forever. And they will. Do you know how many sentient species in the
multiverse developed an industrial base, liberal democracy, and human rights without
killing themselves or collapsing into barbarism, Hermes? The number is one. One
sentient species. Mine."
"Don't tell me that getting stuck under Mt. Elbrus with an eagle eating your liver was
all part of the plan."
"You don't think so? Hermes, I am vast. I comprise universes. In my mind is every
branch of possibility-space that ever will be or could have been. What's the point of
going outside, when the outside is all inside of me? I set up the world how I wanted it,
ensured it would go the right direction, and then retired somewhere quiet, somewhere
with space to think."
"But the eagle?"
"Okay, I admit I kind of dropped the ball on that one. The Fates are petty little
bitches."
"So now what?"
"So now you remove the eagle, and I'm happy, and you're happy."
"Except for this malaria thing."
"Think of that as my little joke."

"Your joke. You expect me to believe that?"
"I expect you to realize you have no other option, accept my proposal, and leave this
place in another forty-six minutes."
"Fuck you."
"Then I expect you to go back, defeat Athena, and restore the power of the gods.
Except that you will ﬁnd it doesn't go quite as far as it used to. Lightning is a cheap
trick compared to nuclear weapons. Flying chariots are a little underwhelming when
they share the skies with supersonic jets. You will ﬁnd that your accustomed roles
within human society work well for you. You will ﬁnd yourself using your power not to
dominate human society, but to shepherd it along its path. They are entering a very
dangerous time now. Very dangerous. They need divine intervention, but not from
above. They need gods who live disguised among them, and need them as much as
they need you, and shepherd them. Athena cannot do it alone, not properly, so I will
give you what you need to stop her. I have foreseen your path, and I know you rise to
the occasion. So go, with my blessing, and serve Man."
"Fuck you, just tell me what message I'm sending."
"A hundred characters? Hmmm. ATH CAN'T HOLD POWER IN BODY. NEEDS FOCUS,
PROBABLY IDOL. DONATE $1503.15 TO AMF, THEN DESTROY IDOL."
Hermes typed it onto his cell phone. "And how are we going to get around all of the
oaths and precautions?
"Tell me, Hermes, when did you swear your oath by the River Styx?"
"Three days ago."
"Good. If you don't remember swearing the oath, you can't be bound by it. So you
need to overdose on Lethe-water, enough to erase three days from your mind. I
imagine you've been planning this escapade for a while, so when you wake up in a
cave in the Caucasus with a cell phone bearing a message, you'll be able to piece
together what happened. The message is framed such that the donation looks like
part of the plan, so Heracles won't notice anything amiss. You'll probably ﬁgure it out,
but you're an honorable god and you'll feel compelled to stick to the bargain that you
must have made with me. None of this breaks your current oath, which only says you
must not carry out any of my terms, not that you must not mention them in your
message. Overdosing on Lethe-water is only a suggestion of mine, not itself a term
necessary to procure my agreement, so it should not be prohibited."
Hermes sighed with relief. "Your plan isn't going to work, Prometheus. Heracles is
going to force-feed me the Lethe water before taking out his earplugs, so I can't
communicate with him and ask him to change the dose. And even if I could, I only
brought eight hours' worth of Lethe water anyway. Sixteen if you count Heracles' vial."
"There are two ways to increase the eﬀect of a drug," said Prometheus. "You can
increase the dose. Or you can decrease the rate at which metabolism eliminates it
from the body. Since our dose of Lethe water is limited, we're going to go with the
second. Heracles will give you exactly the amount of Lethe water you told him, but
your body will fail to process it as usual, and it will have ten times the expected eﬀect,
causing you to forget your oath and be able to accept my amended terms when you
ﬁnd them on your phone."

"How are you going to change my metabolism?"
"Most drugs are metabolized by the liver. By manipulating liver size, we can tailor the
metabolic rate to any level that we want."
"Manipulating liver size?" Hermes didn't like the sound of this.
"Yes. Hepatectomy is a very safe, commonplace surgery. But even if it weren't, you
would have nothing to fear. Surgeons' success rates correlate with their number of
hours of experience. And we have the most experienced liver removal specialist in the
multiverse right here on Mt. Elbrus."
"Oh no," said Hermes. "You're not...oh no oh no oh no."
The eagle gave a voracious shriek.
9. Everybody
The pantheon met in the Pantheon, as was tradition. Hermes and his girlfriend Tyche
came ﬁrst; the God Of Commerce took a seat in the center just below the oculus, as
the Goddess Of Fortune ushered away confused tourists. Gradually the rest trickled in.
Poseidon, tracking water wherever he stepped. Apollo, dapper as ever in a tweed coat
and bowtie, and Artemis, dressed in camo. Nike, dressed like she had just come from
the gym. And Dionysus, in his stained Sigma Alpha Epsilon sweatshirt. He caught
Hermes' eye. "HEEEEEEY, BRO!" he said. "HOW'S IT HANGING?" Hermes just ignored
him.
Hades was over near the entrance, talking to Aphrodite. "Hey Aph," he said aﬀably.
"Want a pomegranate?"
Aphrodite's eyes narrowed. "Is it one of your magical pomegranates that makes
anyone who eats it obligated to become your wife?"
"Uh..." said Hades, shifting his eyes back and forth. "It...might not be?"
"I'll pass," said Aphrodite.
The missing stood out by their absence. Ares was not with them, for obvious reasons.
Athena had obviously not been invited to the conspiracy against her. And Zeus, King
Of The Gods, was nowhere to be seen. Hermes had begged and cajoled, but to no
eﬀect; he was still angry at having given up Prometheus' key when drunk. "This is our
last chance," said Hermes, "the most important thing you'll ever do." But Zeus was
having none of it. He had (he said in a half-drunken stupor) just met with a Hollywood
talent scout, who had told him that he was perfect to star in a movie about the Trojan
War. He was going to strike it big and become a celebrity and then open up his own
water company, and Athena would never know what hit her. That was his plan and he
was sticking to it.
Well, he would work with what he had.
"My fellow gods!" he announced, and everyone turned to look at him.
"By now you've heard the news. Athena has used her bottled-water monopoly to seize
divine power for herself. She has opened the gates to Tartarus; none of us are safe. If

we ever want to be more than the second-rate has-beens we are now, we need to stop
her. I know how we're going to do it."
Some gasps. Apollo looked thoughtful. "WOOOOOOOOOO!" shouted Dionysus. "YOU
GO, HERMES!"
"Athena's collected so much power that she can't hold it all herself," he said. He'd
gone over all this with Apollo, a few days after waking up in the cave with a terrible
headache; the two of them had managed to expand Prometheus' cryptic message into
an actionable plan. He was very suspicious that a seemingly unrelated order to donate
a very speciﬁc sum of money was a command of Prometheus' that had slipped past
his security, but he wasn't sure how, and he wasn't going to take the risk. He'd made
the donation - now the rest was up to them.
"She can't hold it all herself," he continued, "so she needs some kind of
supplementary focus. Sympathetic magic. Like calls out to like. She needs an idol. And
not just any idol. It would have to be something really special, an idol of Athena that
generations of mortals have identiﬁed with the deepest secrets of her power. The
history books list two such idols. One, the giant statue in the Parthenon. That's
destroyed. Two, the Palladium. It was there in Troy. It was there in Rome. Now we think
it's in the Athena Mineral Water headquarters. Why? Because that kind of power would
stand out like a sore thumb unless it was outshone by the presence of another
immortal. Athena sure wouldn't trust anyone else with it, so she's got it herself. It
must be hollow. The divine energy must be stored inside of it. If we can ﬁnd and
destroy it, then Athena loses her power and it ﬂows into alternate conduits. Like us. In
other words, we get our magic back."
"WOOOOOOOO!" shouted Dionysus.
"Please refrain from cheering until the entire speech is over," said Hermes. "Anyway,
here's my plan. We're going to split in two. One group is going to be the powerhouses.
Apollo, Artemis, Hades, Poseidon, Aphrodite, Dionysus. You're all strong, skilled with
weapons, or both. You're going to smash things, create a distraction. You're going to
avoid confronting Athena directly, because Ares already showed us how that turns out.
While my sister is chasing after you, the second group slips in. That's me and Tyche.
Hades has given me his helm of invisibility, which should be enough power to hide
both of us from view. Tyche's the Goddess Of Fortune. She can ﬁnd anything. And I'm
the God Of Thieves. I can break into anywhere. She'll lead me straight to the
Palladium, I'll nab it, break the thing in two, and then we're home free. Any questions?
Comments?"
"It's a good plan," said Apollo, nodding his head.
"WOOOOOOOOOO!" shouted Dionysus.
"Just do it!" agreed Nike.
And before they could change their mind, Hermes teleported the lot of them to the
lobby of Athena Mineral Water.
They appeared in a ﬂash of light. People stepped back, shocked. The teleportation was
strange enough. But Poseidon was still holding his golden trident. Hades was
surrounded by some kind of miasma. And Aphrodite was buck naked. They didn't
exactly blend in.

"Distraction!" whispered Hermes, just before taking Tyche's hand and vanishing from
view.
"Uh," said Dionysus. "IS EVERYONE HERE READY TO PAAAAAAAAARTY?"
"It'll do," muttered Hermes.
He and Tyche made their way up side staircases. Athena's aura wouldn't be able to
hide the Palladium at any kind of a distance. It had to be really close to her oﬃce.
They came to the CEO suite by a back entrance, then pressed themselves against a
wall as they saw "Ms. Athena" walk by, talking on a cell phone. "Yeah," she was
saying unconvincingly, "that does sound weird. No, no idea what's going on. I'll be
down to investigate. Thanks for the tip."
When she was out of view, they snuck into her oﬃce. It looked very normal. A few
potted plants. A Bosses' Day card. Some gold-plated "Female Entrepreneur Visionary
Leadership" awards. A wall full of framed news articles "ATHENA MINERAL WATER
BOASTS GODLIKE PROFITS", "BEHIND THE STARTUP CHANGING HOW THE WORLD
DRINKS". A bottle of product on her desk, either for display or hydration. No idols.
"Cold," said Tyche.
"Cold?" asked Hermes.
"If it were here, I would know. It's not here."
"Well, let's check nearby."
They checked Athena's secretary's oﬃce. They checked Athena's closet. They
checked the oﬃce of the Assistant To The CEO, the Director Of The Oﬃce Of The CEO.
They checked the executive bathroom. No idols.
"Super cold," said Tyche. "Hermes, it's nowhere near here."
"Fuck," said Hermes. "We've got to go. Find the others and tell them to disengage,
before it's too late."
They ran down the stairs until they reached the lobby. It was in a state of disarray.
Chairs and potted plants overturned. Three parallel lines on the the big LCD screen
that looked like they had been scratched by a trident. There was a magic silver arrow
sticking out of one wall. No gods.
"Okay," said Tyche. "They've been here. They must be retreating."
They ran outside. A trail of water on the sidewalk suggested the route taken by
Poseidon. The parking garage. He could see ﬂashes of lightning on the lower levels.
He wouldn't be able to get through that way. He channeled all his power into his
winged sandals, and he and Tyche lurched into the air, coming to rest on the top ﬂoor
of the structure. He ran down and almost bumped into Aphrodite.
"Hey, sexy," she said. "What's going on?"
He could see the others now. Hades and Poseidon were defending the road leading to
the lower level. Athena was below, hurling lightning at them. They were in retreat.
Artemis stood on the bed of a pickup truck, taking shots with her magic arrows. Nike

was with her, pointing out targets. Dioynsus seemed to be passed out on the
concrete, and Aphrodite and Apollo were holding up the rear.
"We've got to get out of here," Hermes told the two of them. "I was wrong. The
Palladium's not in the building."
A lightning bolt shattered one of the big concrete pillars. "You dare stand against me?"
shouted Athena. "For too long, I've played second-ﬁddle to lesser deities like
yourselves! When I awoke a few centuries ago, it removed the last doubt from my
mind. Everything I predicted was true. Nowadays, who cares about agriculture? Who
cares about the sea? Who even believes in the Underworld? The sun is a giant ball of
gas. The moon is a giant ball of rock. There's only one thing that matters today, and
that's intellect! And how better to enshrine the triumph of intellect over human aﬀairs,
then to have the Goddess Of Wisdom destroy the lesser gods and become a pantheon
unto herself? People these days want monotheism, and I'm going to give it to them!"
"You're wrong!" Apollo stepped into the fray. "Intellect is important, yes! You deserve
to be honored, and nobody will take that away from you! But without Reason to guide
it, intellect becomes monstrous. Without Art, and Music, and Poetry, intellect becomes
sterile. And without Healing, intellect becomes divorced from compassion."
"AND THE SEA IS REALLY GREAT TOO," added Poseidon.
Athena rose into the air, crackling with energy. "For now," she said. "For now, intellect
runs on puny mortal minds that will get all sad if they don't have their music and their
beachfront houses. But that was a mistake, Apollo. We didn't want humans. We
wanted apes just barely smart enough to sacriﬁce some rams to us and be properly
grateful. Then Prometheus got involved, and everything went wrong. I'm going to ﬁx
his mistake. Genetic engineering, robotics, so many diﬀerent options. Create minds
that don't need art, that don't waste their time with music or lolling at the beach." She
looked at Artemis. "Destroy the forests and pave them over with factories." She
looked at Dionysus. "Replace partying with study and productive work." She looked at
Aphrodite. "Replace the vagaries of love with rational breeding based on genetic
potential." She looked at Hades. "Machines, that were never alive and so can never
die." She looked at Poseidon. "Tame the sea for tidal power - "
"YOU'RE TOUCHING THE SEA OVER MY DEAD BODY!" Poseidon shouted, and rushed at
her with his trident.
"We've got to get out of here," Hermes whispered to Apollo. "Get together as many as
you can. We're going to make a run for it."
"She's blocking the only exit," Apollo said. "Where do we go?"
"To the roof! I can carry some of you with my wings. The rest will have to jump."
A few other gods had gotten the gist of the conversation, started running to the top of
the parking garage. There was a loud thud, then the sound of sparks. It didn't sound
good.
"I don't understand," said Apollo. "How could the Palladium not be in the tower?"
"I don't know!" Hermes protested. "If it wasn't disguised by a god's aura..."

"Then ipso facto it must be with some other god," said Apollo. "Who are we missing?
Demeter?"
"Demeter? She hates Athena, thinks her bottled water is destroying the environment."
There was another crash. Apollo, Tyche, and Hermes made it onto the roof of the
parking structure. They couldn't tell how many other gods were still following.
"Okay then, Hera?"
"I checked. There's a court record of all of her property, after the divorce with Zeus.
Nothing about any idols. And she doesn't like Athena either, something something
Trojan something. Nobody likes Athena. And seriously, who's going to take a magic
idol and just say 'sure, I'll hold on to this, no further questions'."
"Wait," said Apollo.
Hermes waited.
"Does it have to be a god god? What about a demigod? An immortal human?"
"Um. In theory it could work. But it would be such a small eﬀect. They'd have to stay
right by the idol, day in, day out, or it wouldn't be disguised at all."
Apollo was already taking out his cell phone. "Dory, Dory, please pick up."
Nike ran onto the roof of the parking garage. There was a big gash down one of her
arms. "She's right behind us!" she told them. "We've got to go!"
"Wait," said Apollo. "Dory, pick up the phone."
There was another crash. The parking structure started to wobble.
Apollo heard a noise from the other side of the phone, but no greeting. Right. She
wouldn't open the conversation.
"Pandora?" he asked. "Are you there?"
"Hi Apollo," came her voice.
"Dory," said Apollo. "That statue on your desk, the one of the woman in armor. I need
you to take it and smash it, really hard."
"Okay," said Pandora. There was a brief pause. "Done."
"Done? Did you break the statue?"
"No, it's very hard, it doesn't seem to have broken."
"Fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck," said Apollo.
Of all people, Dionysus managed to crawl his way to the top of the structure. "It's
getting really gnarly down there," he announced before collapsing back into
unconsciousness.

"Okay. I need you to feel along the sides of the statue. Is there any kind of switch,
anything that's going to get it to release the power that it's stored?"
A brief pause. "There's...a knob and a hinge."
"Okay, Pandora. I need you to turn the knob and open the statue."
"Apollo, I don't open things."
"Look, Dory, I don't ask you for much. I've known you for I can't even remember how
many centuries, and I know things are hard for you, I've respected that. But Dory, you
need to open that statue."
"You know I don't open things!"
The last few gods ran onto the top of the parking structure. Just behind them ﬂoated
Athena, her eyes jet black, her whole body crackling with electricity. "There's nowhere
left to run," she taunted them. "You're all going to Tartarus now. Any last words?"
"Uh," said Hades, "want a pomegranate?"
Athena held her hands forth. The sky darkened. The air seemed to stir.
"Dory, you made a mistake once, and it was really bad, I'm not denying that, but you
told me yourself, the one thing you did right was keep Hope. I need you to be hopeful
now. I need you to hope that someday, somebody, us, humans, somebody we're not
even considering, might be able to reverse what you did. Might be able to put those
evils back in the box. I need you to think that that's possible. But not going to happen
without our help. Please, Pandora, trust me on this. And what I need you to do right
now is open that statue."
Lightning arced back and forth across the heavens. Time seemed to stop.
Then there was a loud pop.
10. Zeus
Zeus had come onto stage believing it was an audition for a big-budget ﬁlm about the
Trojan War. It wasn't. Out ran a young woman, her face streaked with tears. "You said
you loved me!" she said. "We had a child together! And then you...you disappeared!"
"Hey now," said Zeus. "What's this now? Who are you? Whaddyatalkinabout?"
"Don't you recognize me?" sobbed the woman. "I'm Sara! From Biloxi! We met in '98!
Oh god! You don't even remember me. You've probably abandoned with so many
women that you don't even remember them! How many were there after me? Ten? A
hundred?"
"Hang on now," said Zeus. "I ain't the kind of guy who hooks up with no hundred
women."
"In fact," said Alice DiScorria, walking on to stage. "He is precisely that kind of guy. If
you don't believe me, believe Amy. And Bethany. And Billy Rae. And Caroline. And
Connie."
As she said each name, each woman came on to the stage.

"Dana. Daria. Dina..."
Some of them were crying. Some of them looked lost. Some of them had steely
determination in their eyes.
"...Jackie. Jessica. Jennifer. Jun-Li..."
"Nah, yer just messin' with me now. What is this, some kinda trap? I want a lawyer,
lady. I got my rights!"
"...Samantha. Sara. Sarah. Shaniqua. Susan..."
The stage was almost full now.
"You sayin' I slept with all these women? I didn't sleep with none of em. I want my
lawyer, right now."
"Actually," said Alice, "we're not saying these are the women you slept with. We're
saying these are the women you slept with, had children with, and then abandoned
without paying child support."
"That's a goddanged lie," said Zeus. "I ain't even got no children."
"Zeus is telling us that he 'ain't even got no children'," Alice told her viewers. "Alas,
we have two hundred and ﬁve people in our studio audience today who think
otherwise. Would you please stand up? Aaron. Adam. Althea. Ava. Bethany Junior.
Berenice." She realized she was starting to lose her audience's attention. "And all the
rest."
Two hundred ﬁve members of the studio audience, ranging fron toddlers to adults,
stood up. They were all unusually large, and many of the men had big, ﬂowing beards.
"This is goddanged lies, is what it is!" shouted Zeus. "None of these people ain't my
children, and that's the truth!"
"Zeus says that none of these people are his children," said Alice. "We ran paternity
tests for every single one of them before the show. Let's see what they say." She took
out a big stack of manila envelopes, opened the ﬁrst one. "Aaron...Zeus is the father!
Adam...Zeus is the father! Althea...Zeus is the father!"
One of the women on stage ﬁnally lost it, grabbed a folding chair, and swung at Zeus.
He deﬂected the blow easily, then pushed her back, just a little too rough. Suddenly
the stage had become a brawl, one hundred ninety enraged women against one
underpowered god.
"Ava...Zeus is the father! Bethany Junior...Zeus is the father! Berenice...Zeus is the
father! Chou-yang...Zeus is the father! Cleo...Zeus is the father!"
The brawl on stage was getting really bad now. A few women were down for the count.
Zeus was bleeding all over his face. Some of the staﬀ started to wonder whether they
should override Alice and call security.
"Demetrius...Zeus is the father! Delia...Zeus is the father! Darragh...Zeus is the
father! Dominique...Zeus is the father!"

One of the women had gotten hold of Zeus hair and was holding him, pinned, while
another was slapping his face. Zeus tried to kick, but ended up losing his balance.
Security guards were pushing through the crowd of women, who were resisting their
eﬀorts.
"Edna...Zeus is the father! Elena...Zeus is..."
Then there was a loud popping sound that seemed to come from everywhere and
nowhere. And then Zeus eﬀortlessly pushed the crowd of women away from him. For a
second, he looked confused by his own strength. He stared at his newly-rippling
muscles, looked down at the ground as if he couldn't quite believe how tall he was.
Nobody moved.
Then he shouted, "DAMN RIGHT I'M YOUR FATHER! I'M ALL YER FATHERS. I AM ZEUS
OLYMPIOS, KING OF THE GODS, CLOUD-GATHERER, THUNDERER, MIGHTIEST OF
IMMORTALS! AND IIIIII'M BAAAAAAAAAAAAACK."
The crackle of lightning ﬁlled the halls, knocked over the security guards. The
audience stampeded to the exits. Women started to run oﬀ the stage.
"I AM ZEUS, KING OF GODS AND MEN. AND I'M TURNING YOU ALL INTO ANIMALS!"
Amy became an anteater. Bethany became a duck. Billy Rae became a tree shrew.
Caroline became an otter. He turned Connie into a rattlesnake and Dana into a
panther, Daria into a Komodo dragon and Dina into a bat. It was over in minutes.
Everyone had either escaped or been transformed, besides Zeus and the hostess.
"Yer still here," said Zeus, surprised.
"I am everywhere," said Eris Discordia.
"What happened?" asked Zeus.
"The same thing that happens everywhere, all the time" said Eris. "People had
conﬂicting aims. They struggled for power. Some won, others lost. The winners will
celebrate, thinking their victory irreversible, and the losers will mourn, plotting their
vengeance. And around them, the world changes irreversibly, in ways none of them
predicted."
"Huh," said Zeus.
"In a few hours, news will come that a sudden electrical storm struck the set of my
show, unfortunately causing the cameras to stop recording. Some people will be
missing, casualties of the disaster. Others will say all sorts of strange things and be
ignored. There will be lots of ﬁghts about it, and they'll all call each other things like
'sheeple' and 'denialist' and 'moron'. It will be wonderful."
"Huh," said Zeus.
"In the meantime, the studio is ruined. I suppose I will have to ﬁnd a new job. Can you
believe it, Zeus? In the old days, I was barred from every city and temple, driven out
into the wilderness as an enemy of mankind. Now they pay me to cause discord. What
a world!"
"It's...somethin'," said Zeus

"And it's all thanks to people like you," said Eris. "So before we part ways again,
before the poets end their songs and the next myth begins, please accept a token of
appreciation. From me, to you."
In her hand appeared a shining golden apple.
Epilogue: Trump
"Yeah," real estate mogul Donald Trump said into the phone. "Look, I gotta go, Carl. I
gotta be at a gala tonight - yeah, the one for the American Eagle Museum. Terrible
stuﬀ, Carl, just terrible. Gotta go."
He hung up. It really was terrible stuﬀ. Just a year ago, an anti-malaria charity had
funded a grant that happened to precisely match its yearly budget surplus. The
research had borne fruit - a new insecticide, kind of a super-DDT without the
environmental damages. DDT, of course, was famous for killing endangered birds, but
they thought they'd tested it properly this time, dozens of diﬀerent bird species, no
problems at all. So they'd deployed it worldwide, and malaria rates had plummeted.
Only they hadn't tested the environmental consequences as well as they'd thought.
99% of bird species escaped unscathed - but every eagle in the world had died an
unimaginably agonizing death. The whole situation was so strange that the FBI
launched an investigation - then closed it a few weeks later for absence of motive.
Who could possibly hate eagles that much?
He put on his suit and tie, and was just about ready to head out when a beam of
radiant light appeared in the middle of his room and coalesced into three women.
"Greetings to you, Mr. Trump," said the oldest. "I am Hera, Queen of the Gods. These
are my colleagues Aphrodite and Athena. You are the man who runs the Miss Universe
beauty contest, yes?"
He took a step back, dazzled by her radiance. "Um...yes."
"Zeus, God of Thunder, recently came into possession of a golden apple. Then a
second golden apple, found when searching a convent in Ukraine that had become a
center of, ah, certain recent events. There are three of us and only two apples, so we
petitioned Zeus to determine how they might be divied up. He replied that
traditionally they go to the fairest, and so urged us to seek the foremost mortal judge
of female beauty and implore his assistance. If you truly run beauty pageants for the
entire universe, then you are the judge that we seek."
Then she spoke diﬀerently, directly into his mind. And as an added incentive, if you
choose me, I swear by the River Styx that I will make you the most powerful man in
the world.
He'd barely had time to process the thought when Aphrodite stared at him, and a
voice like music touched his consciousness, saying Pick me, and I swear by the River
Styx that I will give you any woman you desire. Models, supermodels, they can all be
yours.
Then a third voice, lower, more dispassionate, and he heard Athena say Select me as
most beautiful, and I swear by the River Styx that I will grant you wisdom, prudence,
and the intelligence to make the right decision under any circumstance.
Donald Trump just stared.

"Well?" asked Hera.
"He's not answering!" said Athena.
"Waaaaait a second," said Aphrodite. "Athena, did you ever turn oﬀ that glamour you
had, that made mortals around you unable to process the presence of gods?"
"How was I supposed to turn that oﬀ?" asked Athena. "It took the whole divine power
of the universe to create that, and then you took that away from me. Now I'm just a
goddess like anyone else, doing - " she spat "community service to make up for past
misdeeds. And it's not even like I didn't help you guys bring Ares back."
"So what you're saying," interrupted Hera, "is that he can't even see us?"
"He can see us," said Athena. "He just can't comprehend that anything unusual might
be going on," said Athena.
Finally, Donald Trump rubbed his eyes, and said "I got no idea who any of you are, or
why you're in my apartment, but - " he pointed at Aphrodite and Hera "you and you
are smokin'. You," he said, pointing to Athena and frowning, "look like a dyke in that
armor. Seriously, get a makeover."
Then he walked out the door.
"Huh," said Hera.
"Too bad," Aphrodite told Athena. "Just goes to show that brains aren't everything."
"Yes, well," said the Goddess of Wisdom, a little too haughtily to be anything but
compensation, "I'm just glad we ﬁnally made it through one of those without causing
any unfortunate side eﬀects for world history."
"Yes," said Hera. "I suppose we did. There's a ﬁrst time for everything."
[Acknowledgments: the idea of Zeus on a trashy TV show comes from this Tumblr post. Ideas for the Prometheus character came from
AI boxing and The Wise Man's Fear. The ﬁrst two word squares come from here and here.]

