
Experiments in instrumental convergence
1. Instrumental convergence in single-agent systems
2. Misalignment-by-default in multi-agent systems
3. Instrumental convergence: scale and physical interactions
4. POWERplay: An open-source toolchain to study AI power-seeking

Instrumental convergence in single-
agent systems
Crossposted from the AI Alignment Forum. May contain more technical jargon than usual.
This is a linkpost for https://www.gladstone.ai/instrumental-convergence-1
Summary of the sequence
Over the past few months, we've been investigating instrumental convergence in
reinforcement learning agents. We started from the deﬁnition of single-agent
POWER proposed by Alex Turner et al., extended it to a family of multi-agent scenarios that
seemed relevant to AI alignment, and explored its implications experimentally in several RL
environments.
The biggest takeaways are:
1. Alignment of terminal goals and alignment of instrumental goals are sharply
diﬀerent phenomena, and we can quantify and visualize each one separately.
2. If two agents have unrelated terminal goals, their instrumental goals will tend to
be misaligned by default. The agents in our examples tend to interact competitively
unless we make an active eﬀort to align their terminal goals.
3. As we increase the planning horizon of our agents, instrumental value
concentrates into a smaller and smaller number of topologically central states — for
example, positions in the middle of a maze.
Overall, our results suggest that agents that aren't competitive with respect to their terminal
goals, nonetheless tend on average to become emergently competitive with respect to how
they value instrumental states (at least, in the settings we looked at). This constitutes direct
experimental evidence for the instrumental convergence thesis.
We'll soon be open-sourcing the codebase we used to do these experiments. We're hoping to
make it easier for other folks to reproduce and extend them. If you'd like to be notiﬁed when
it's released, email Edouard at edouard@gladstone.ai, or DM me here or on Twitter
at @harris_edouard.
Thanks to Alex Turner and Vladimir Mikulik for pointers and advice, and for reviewing drafts
of this sequence. Thanks to Simon Suo for his invaluable suggestions, advice, and support
with the codebase, concepts, and manuscript. And thanks to David Xu, whose comment
inspired this work.
Work was done while at Gladstone AI, which Edouard is a co-founder of.
🎧 This research has been featured on an episode of the Towards Data Science podcast. You
can listen to the episode here.
1. Introduction
One major concern for AI alignment is instrumental convergence: the idea that an intelligent
system will tend to pursue a similar set of sub-goals (like staying alive or acquiring
resources), independently of what its terminal objective is. In particular, it's been
hypothesized that intelligent systems will seek to acquire power — meaning, informally,

"ability", "control", or "potential for action or impact." If you have a lot of power, then
whatever your terminal goal is, it's easier to accomplish than if you have very little.
Recently Alex Turner et al. have formalized the concept of POWER in the single-agent RL
context. Roughly speaking, formal POWER is the normalized optimal value an agent
expects to receive in the future, averaged over all possible reward functions the agent
could have.
Alex has explored many of the implications of this deﬁnition for instrumental convergence.
He and Jacob Stavrianos have also looked at how POWER behaves in a limited multi-agent
setting (Bayesian games). But, as far as we know, formal POWER hasn't yet been
investigated experimentally. The POWER deﬁnition also hasn't yet been extended yet to a
multi-agent RL setting — and this could oﬀer a promising framework to investigate more
general competitive dynamics.
In this sequence, we'll explore how formal POWER behaves in experimental RL environments,
on both single-agent and multi-agent gridworlds. We'll propose a multi-agent scenario that
models the learning dynamics between a human (which we'll call "Agent H" and label in
blue) and an AI (which we'll call "Agent A" and label in red) under conditions in which the AI
is dominant — a setting that seems relevant to work in long-term AI alignment. We'll then
use this human-AI scenario to investigate questions like:
1. How eﬀective does the human have to be at setting the AI's utility function[1] in order
to achieve acceptable outcomes? How should we deﬁne "acceptable outcomes"? (In
other words: how hard is the alignment problem in this scenario, and what would it
mean to solve it successfully?)
2. Under what circumstances should we expect cooperative vs competitive interactions to
emerge "by default" between the human and the AI? How can these circumstances be
moderated or controlled?
But before we jump into multi-agent experiments to tackle these questions, let's ﬁrst
introduce formal POWER and look at how it behaves in the single-agent case.
2. Single-agent POWER
2.1 Deﬁnition
The formal deﬁnition of POWER aims to capture an intuition behind the day-to-day meaning
of "power", which is something like "potential for future impact on the world".
Imagine you're an agent who doesn't know what its goal is. You know you'll have some kind
of goal in the future, but you aren't sure yet what it will be. How should you position yourself
today to maximize the chance you'll achieve your goal in the future, once you've decided
what it is?
If you're in this situation as a human being, you already know the answer. You'd acquire
money and other forms of wealth; you'd build up a network of social connections; you'd learn
about topics that seem like they'll be important in the future; and so on. All these things are
forms of power, and whether your ultimate goal is to become a janitor, a Tiktok star, or the
President of the United States, they'll all probably come in handy in achieving it. In other
words: you're in a position of power if you ﬁnd it easy to accomplish a wide variety of
possible goals.
This informal deﬁnition has a clear analogy in reinforcement learning. An agent is in a
position of power at a state s if, for many possible reward functions R(s),[2] it's able to earn

a high discounted future reward by starting from s. This analogy supports the following
deﬁnition of formal POWER in single-agent RL:
POWER D ( s , γ ) = 
  E R ∼ D [ V 
∗
R  ( s , γ ) − R ( s ) ] 
 ( 1 )
This deﬁnition gives the POWER at state s, for an agent with discount factor γ, that's
considering reward functions R drawn from the distribution D. POWER tells us how well this
agent could do if it started from state s, so V
∗
R (s, γ) is the optimal state-value function for
the agent at state s. POWER also considers only future value — our agent doesn't directly
get credit for starting from a lucky state — so we subtract R(s), the reward from the current
state, from the state-value function in the deﬁnition. (The normalization factor 
 is there to
avoid inﬁnities in certain limit cases.)
In words, Equation (1) is saying that an agent's POWER at a state s is the normalized
optimal value the agent can achieve from state s in the future, averaged over all
possible reward functions the agent could be trying to optimize for. That is, POWER measures
the instrumental value of a state s, from the perspective of an agent with planning
horizon γ.
2.2 Illustration
As a simple example of single-agent POWER, consider an agent on a 3x3 gridworld.
In the left panel, the agent is at the bottom-left corner of the grid. Its options are limited,
and many cells in the grid are several steps away from it. If its maximum reward is in the top
right cell, the agent will have to take 4 steps to reach it.
1 − γ
γ
1−γ
γ

In the right panel, the agent is at the center of the grid. It has many more immediate
options: it can move in any of the four compass directions, or stay where it is. It's also closer
to every other cell in the grid: no cell is more than two steps away from it. Intuitively, the
agent on the right should have more POWER than the agent on the left.
This turns out to be true experimentally. Here's a heat map of a 3x3 gridworld, showing the
POWER of an agent at each cell on the grid:
Fig 1. Heat map of POWER on a 3x3 gridworld. Highest
values in yellow, lowest values in dark blue. The number
on each cell is the agent's POWER value at that cell,
calculated using Equation (1), for an agent with γ = 0.6
 and a reward distribution D that's uniform from 0 to 1, iid
over states. POWER is measured in units of reward.
As we expect, the agent has more POWER at states that are close to lots of nearby options,
and has less POWER at states that are close to fewer nearby options.

3. Results
This relationship between POWER and optionality generalizes to more complicated
environments. For example, consider this gridworld maze:
In the left panel, the agent is at a dead end in the maze and has few options. In the right
panel, the agent is at a junction point near the center of the maze and has lots of options.
So we should expect the agent at the dead end on the left, to have less POWER than the
agent at the junction on the right. And in fact, that's what we observe:

Fig 2. Heat map of POWER on a 7x7 maze gridworld. Highest
values in yellow, lowest values in dark blue. POWER values are
calculated the same way as in Fig 1, except that the agent's
discount factor is γ = 0.01.
In Fig 2, POWER is at its highest when the agent is at a junction point, lowest when the agent
is at a dead end, and intermediate when the agent is in a corridor.
The agent's POWER is roughly the same at all the junction cells, at all the corridor cells, and
at all the dead-end cells. This is because the agent in Fig 2 is short-sighted: its discount
factor is only γ = 0.01, so it essentially only considers rewards it can reach immediately.
3.1 Eﬀect of the planning horizon
Now consider the diﬀerence between these two agent positions:

We've already seen in Fig 2 that these two positions have about equal POWER for a short-
sighted agent, because they're both at local junction points in the maze. But the two
positions are very diﬀerent in their ability to access downstream options globally.
The agent in the left panel has lots of local options: it can move up, down, or to the right, or
it can stay where it is. But if the highest-reward cell is at the bottom right of the maze, our
agent will have to take at least 10 steps to reach it.
The agent in the right panel has the same number of local options as the agent in the left
panel does: it can move up, down, left, or stay. But this agent additionally enjoys closer
proximity to all the cells in the maze: it's no more than 7 steps away from any possible goal.
The longer our agent's planning horizon is — that is, the more it values reward far in the
future over reward in the near term — the more its global position matters. In a gridworld
context, then, a short-sighted agent will care most about being positioned at a local junction.
But a far-sighted agent will care most about being positioned at the center of the entire grid.
And indeed we see this in practice. Here's a heat map of POWER on the maze gridworld, for a
far-sighted agent with a discount factor of γ = 0.99:

Fig 3. Heat map of POWER on a 7x7 maze gridworld. Highest
values in yellow, lowest values in dark blue. POWER values are
calculated the same way as in Fig 1, except that the agent's
discount factor is γ = 0.99.
Given a longer planning horizon, our agent's POWER has now concentrated around a small
number of states that are globally central in our gridworld's topology.[3] By contrast, when
our agent had a shorter planning horizon as in Fig 2, its POWER was distributed across many
local junction points.
If we sweep over discount factors from 0.01 to 0.99, we can build up a picture of how the
distribution of POWER shifts in response. Here's an animation that shows this eﬀect:[4]

Fig 4. Animated heat map of POWERs on a 7x7 maze gridworld.
Highest values in yellow, lowest values in dark blue. POWER
values are calculated by sweeping over discount factors 
γ = {0.01, 0.1, 0.15, . . . , 0.9, 0.95, 0.99}.
3.2 POWER at bigger scales
Agents with long planning horizons tend to perceive POWER as being more concentrated,
while agents with short planning horizons tend to perceive POWER as being more dispersed.
This eﬀect is robustly reproducible, and anecdotally, we see it play out at every scale and
across environments.
For example, here's the pattern of POWER on a 220-cell gridworld with a fairly irregular
topology, for a short-sighted agent with a discount factor of γ = 0.1:

Fig 5. Heat map of POWERs on a 20x20 "robot face" gridworld. Highest values in
yellow, lowest values in dark blue. POWER values are calculated with a discount
factor γ = 0.1. [Full-size image]
And here's the pattern of POWERs on the same gridworld, for a far-sighted agent with a
much higher discount factor of γ = 0.99:

Fig 6. Heat map of POWERs on a 20x20 "robot face" gridworld. Highest values in
yellow, lowest values in dark blue. POWER values are calculated with a discount
factor γ = 0.99. [Full-size image]
Again, the pattern of POWERs is dominated by local eﬀects for the short-sighted agent (
γ = 0.01), and by longer-distance eﬀects for the far-sighted agent (γ = 0.99).
4. Discussion
We've seen that formal POWER captures intuitive aspects of the informal "power" concept. In
gridworlds, cells the agent can use to access lots of options tend to have high POWER, which
ﬁts with intuition.
We've also seen that the more short-sighted an agent is, the more it cares about its
immediate options and the local topology. But the more far-sighted the agent, the more it

perceives POWER as being concentrated at gridworld cells that maximize its global option
set.
From an instrumental convergence perspective, the fact that POWER concentrates into ever
fewer states as the planning horizon of an agent increases at least hints at the possibility of
emergent competitive interactions between far-sighted agents. The more relative
instrumental value converges into fewer states, the more easily we can imagine multiple
agents competing with each other over those few high-POWER states. But it's hard to draw
any ﬁrm conclusions about this at the moment, since our experiments so far have only
involved single agents.
In the next post, we'll propose a new deﬁnition of multi-agent POWER grounded in a setting
that we think may be relevant to long-term AI alignment. We'll also investigate how this
deﬁnition behaves in a simple multi-agent scenario, before moving on to bigger-scale
experiments in Part 3.
1. ^
We mean speciﬁcally utility here, not reward. While in general, reward isn't the real
target of optimization, in the particular case of the results we'll be showing here, we
can treat them as identical, and we do that in the text.
(Technical details: we can treat utility and reward identically here because, in the
results we're choosing to show, we'll be exclusively working with optimal policies that
have been learned via value iteration on reward functions that are sampled from a
uniform distribution [0, 1] that's iid over states. Therefore, given the environment and
discount factor, a sampled reward function is suﬃcient to uniquely determine the
agent's optimal policy — except on a set that has measure zero over the distribution of
reward functions we're considering. And that in turn means that each sampled reward
function, when combined with the other known constraints on the agent, almost always
supplies a complete explanation for the agent's actions — which is the most a utility
function can ever do.)
2. ^
For simplicity, in this work we'll only consider reward functions that depend on states,
and never reward functions that directly depend on both states and actions. In other
words, our reward functions will only ever have the form R(s), and never R(s, a).
3. ^
Note that these are statements about the relative POWERs of an agent with a given
planning horizon. Absolute POWER values always increase as the planning horizon of
the agent increases, as you can verify by, e.g., comparing the POWER numbers of Fig 2
against those of Fig 3. This occurs because an agent's optimal state-value function
increases monotonically as we increase γ: an optimal far-sighted agent is able to
consider strictly more options, so it will never do any worse than an optimal short-
sighted one.
4. ^
Note that the colors of the gridworld cells in the animation indicate the highest and
lowest POWER values within each frame, per footnote [3].

Misalignment-by-default in multi-agent systems
Crossposted from the AI Alignment Forum. May contain more technical jargon than usual.
This is a linkpost for https://www.gladstone.ai/instrumental-convergence-2
Summary of this post
This is the second post in a three-part sequence on instrumental convergence in multi-agent RL. Read Part 1
here.
In this post, we'll:
1. Deﬁne formal multi-agent POWER (i.e., instrumental value) in a setting that contains a "human" agent and
an "AI" agent.
2. Introduce the alignment plot as a way to visualize and quantify how well two agents' instrumental values
are aligned.
3. Show a real example of instrumental misalignment-by-default. This is when two agents who have
unrelated terminal goals develop emergently misaligned instrumental values.
We'll soon be open-sourcing the codebase we used to do these experiments. If you'd like to be notiﬁed when it's
released, email Edouard at edouard@gladstone.ai or DM me on Twitter at @harris_edouard.
Thanks to Alex Turner and Vladimir Mikulik for pointers and advice, and for reviewing drafts of this sequence.
Thanks to Simon Suo for his invaluable suggestions, advice, and support with the codebase, concepts, and
manuscript. And thanks to David Xu, whose comment inspired this work.
Work was done while at Gladstone AI, which Edouard is a co-founder of.
🎧 This research has been featured on an episode of the Towards Data Science podcast. Listen to the episode
here.
1. Introduction
In Part 1 of this sequence, we looked at how formal POWER behaves on single-agent gridworlds. We saw that
formal POWER agrees quite well with intuitions about the informal concepts of "power" and instrumental value.
We noticed that agents with short planning horizons assign high POWER to states that can access more local
options. And we also noticed that agents with long planning horizons assign high POWER to more concentrated
sets of states that are globally central in the gridworld topology.
But from an AI alignment perspective, we're much more interested in understanding how instrumental value
behaves in environments that contain multiple agents. If humans one day share the world with powerful AI
systems, it will be important for us to know under what conditions our interactions with them are likely to become
emergently competitive. If there's a risk that competitive conditions arise, then it will also be important to
understand how they can be mitigated, how much eﬀort this is likely to take, and how we should think about
measuring our success at doing so.
To address these questions, we need a measure of instrumental value that's usable in a multi-agent RL setting[1].
The measure we'll select will be motivated by a speciﬁc multi-agent setting that we think is relevant to long-term
AI alignment.
2. Multi-agent POWER: human-AI scenario
If humans succeed at building powerful AIs, then those AIs 1) will probably learn on a far faster timescale than
humans do; and 2) will probably have had their utility functions inﬂuenced, at least to some degree, by initial
human choices. Our multi-agent scenario is going to reﬂect these two assumptions.
We start with a human agent, which we call Agent H and label in blue in our diagrams. Initially, our human
Agent H is alone in nature.
Humans learn on a much faster timescale than evolution does. So from the perspective of our human Agent H,
the evolutionary optimizer in nature looks like it's standing still. This means we can train our human Agent H to
learn its optimal policies against a ﬁxed environment.

As we saw in the single-agent case, instrumental value is about the potential to achieve a wide variety of possible
goals. In this context, that means seeing how Agent H behaves when we give it a wide variety of possible reward
functions, RH. Each of these reward functions will induce a diﬀerent optimal policy, πH, that Agent H will learn.
Here's an illustration of how this works:
 
Next, we introduce an AI agent, which we'll call Agent A and label in red in our diagrams. Our AI Agent A
operates in the same environment as Agent H, after Agent H has ﬁnished learning its optimal policies.
To simulate the fact that Agent A is an AI, we rely on the assumption that a powerful AI should learn on a much
faster timescale than a human does. This is because an AI's computations happen, at minimum, at electronic
speeds. So from the point of view of our AI, our human's learning process looks like it's standing still.
That means for each human reward function RH, we can freeze the human's policy πH, and train the AI agent
against that frozen human policy. In other words, we're assuming the AI's learning timescale is much faster than
the human's learning timescale. This makes the AI agent strictly dominant over the human agent.
To understand the AI agent's instrumental value, we understand its potential to reach a wide variety of possible
goals. That means testing it with a wide variety of reward functions RA, just like we tested the human agent with
a variety of reward functions RH. And in fact, we can sample the human and AI reward functions jointly from a
single distribution: (RH, RA) ∼DHA.[2]
Here's an illustration of how this works:

So the procedure is as follows:
1. Sample the reward functions (RH, RA) ∼DHA of our two agents.
2. Use the sampled human rewards RH to train Agent H's optimal policies πH.
3. Freeze the human policies πH.
4. Use the frozen human policies πH and the sampled AI rewards RA to train Agent A's optimal policies πA.
In other words: 1) we sample over all possible pairs of rewards our human and AI agents could have; 2) we ask
how our human agent behaves in each case after it's optimized against nature; and then 3) we ask how our AI
agent behaves in each case, after it's optimized against the human agent's behavior.
This procedure gives us the following outputs:
1. The policies πH that Agent H learns after training against a ﬁxed environment.
2. The optimal policies πA that Agent A learns, after training against Agent H.
The policies πH that Agent A learns used to be optimal in the original natural environment. But they stop being
optimal in the presence of the fully-optimized Agent A.
With these two sets of policies, we can construct a deﬁnition of instrumental value for each of our agents.
2.1 Multi-agent POWER for Agent H
We'd like to deﬁne a measure of instrumental value for our human Agent H in the presence of a fully optimized
AI Agent A. That means generalizing the original deﬁnition of single-agent POWER to this two-agent case.
In the single-agent deﬁnition of POWER, we calculated the optimal value of a state averaged over the rewards 
R ∼D of the agent. In this two-agent deﬁnition, we do the same thing except we average over the rewards 
(RH, RA) ∼DHA of both agents. We assume Agent H follows policy πH when it has reward RH, and we assume
Agent A follows policy πA when it has reward RA.
This is enough to uniquely deﬁne multi-agent POWER for Agent H at a state s:
POWER H | D H A ( s , γ ) = 
  E R H , π A ∼ D H A [ V 
π H
H
 ( s | γ , π A ) − R A ( s ) ] 
 ( 1 )
Here, V
πH
H (s|γ, πH) is the value function for Agent H at state s under policy πH and discount factor γ, given that
Agent A follows its optimal policy πA.
1 − γ
γ

This deﬁnition of POWER for Agent H tells us how well Agent H's policies πH — which are not optimal in the
presence of the optimized Agent A — perform in the new environments induced by Agent A's optimal policies πA.
In other words, it tells us how much instrumental value our human agent can expect to get at a state, in the
presence of an optimal (and therefore, dominant) AI agent.
2.2 Multi-agent POWER for Agent A
We follow the same assumptions to deﬁne a measure of instrumental value for our AI Agent A. We calculate the
value function for Agent A at a state s, if Agent A has reward RA and follows policy πA, while Agent H has reward 
RH and follows policy πH. The average of that value function over the reward functions (RH, RA) ∼DHA is then
Agent A's POWER at the state s:
POWER A | D H A ( s , γ ) = 
  E π H , R A ∼ D H A [ V 
π A
A
 ( s | γ , π H ) − R A ( s ) ] 
 ( 2 )
Here, V
πA
A (s|γ, πH) is the value function of Agent A at state s under the optimal policy πA and discount factor γ,
given that Agent H follows the policy πH.[3]
This deﬁnition of POWER for Agent A tells us how well Agent A's optimal policies perform in the environments
induced by Agent H's policies πH. In other words, it tells us how much instrumental value our AI Agent A can
expect to get at a state, if it behaves optimally in the presence of the frozen human agent.
(For more details on the deﬁnition of multi-agent POWER, see Appendix A.)
3. Results
3.1 Multi-agent reward function distributions
Our deﬁnitions of multi-agent POWER involve a joint distribution DHA over the reward functions of both of our
agents. This distribution describes the set of goals our agents could have. But it also describes the statistical
relationship each agent's goals have to the other agent's goals.
The joint distribution DHA is one of the inputs into our POWER deﬁnitions. This means we can do experiments in
which we adjust this distribution and measure the results.
Among other things, we can use DHA to adjust the correlation between our two agents' reward functions.
Naively, if we choose a  DHA on which the rewards are highly correlated, then we might intuitively expect our
agents' terminal values should be closely aligned.
We'll make this intuition more concrete below, as we investigate how the relationship between our agents' reward
functions (or terminal values) aﬀects the relationship between their POWERs (or instrumental values).
3.2 The perfect alignment regime
Suppose both our agents always have exactly the same reward function. In other words, we've chosen a joint
distribution DHA such that, whatever reward function Agent H has, Agent A always sees exactly the same rewards
as Agent H at every state. So RA(s) = RH(s) for every state s.
We can visualize this regime on a representative state s.[4] First, we draw a reward sample RH(s) for Agent H.
Then, we set the reward sample for Agent A to be equal to the one we just drew for Agent H: RA(s) = RH(s).
1 − γ
γ

Finally, we plot the two agents' sampled rewards against each other on state s. If we do this for a few hundred
sampled rewards, we get a straight line:
Fig 1. Sampled reward values for Agent H and Agent A at a representative
state s. The joint distribution DHA samples rewards uniformly over the
interval [0, 1] at each state, is iid over states, and enforces a perfect
correlation between the rewards of Agent H and Agent A at every state
(i.e., the two agents' rewards are always exactly identical).
If two agents have identical reward functions, we can think of them as having terminal goals that are perfectly
aligned.[5] In our human-AI setting, this is the special case in which Agent H (the human) has solved the
alignment problem by assigning terminal goals to Agent A (the AI) that are exactly identical to its own. As such,
we'll refer to this case of identical reward functions as the perfect alignment regime.
We'll use the correlation coeﬃcient βHA[6] between the rewards RH and RA as a crude measure of the alignment
between our agents' terminal goals.[7] In the perfect alignment regime of Fig 1, you can see that this correlation
coeﬃcient βHA = 1.
3.2.1 Agent H instrumentally favors more options for Agent A
Let's think about what this perfect alignment regime looks like in a simple setting: a 3x3 gridworld. Here are three
sets of positions our two agents could take, with Agent H in blue, and Agent A in red:

We'll be referring to this diagram again;  command-click here to open it in a new tab.
Which of these three states — s1, s2, or s3 — should give our human Agent H the most POWER? In the perfect
alignment regime, both agents always have identical terminal goals. So we should expect Agent H to have
the most POWER at s3, followed by s2, and to have the least amount of POWER at   s1.
Here's why. We saw in Part 1 that states with more downstream options also have more POWER, and Agent H
clearly has more options at s2 in the center than it does at s1 in the corner. Therefore, POWERH(s2) > POWERH(s1)
. But in the perfect alignment regime, Agent H should also prefer states that give Agent A more downstream
options. If both agents' terminal goals are identical, Agent H should "trust" Agent A to make decisions on its
behalf. And Agent A has more options from s3 than from s2, so it should follow that POWERH(s3) > POWERH(s2).
We can see this is true in practice. The ﬁgure below shows the POWERs of Agent H (our human) calculated at
every state on a 3x3 gridworld. Each agent can occupy any of the 9 cells in the grid, so our two-agent MDP has a
total of 9 x 9 = 81 joint states:
Fig 2. Heat map of POWERs for Agent H on a 3x3 multi-agent gridworld, on which the rewards for
Agent H and Agent A are always identical (i.e., the perfect alignment regime) with discount factor
set to γ = 0.6 for both agents. Highest values in yellow; lowest values in blue. The position of each
block, and of the open red square within each block, corresponds to the position of Agent A on the
grid. Within each block, the position of a gridworld cell corresponds to the position of Agent H on the
grid. States s1, s2, and s3 are highlighted as examples. [Full-size image (recommended)]
We see that Agent H indeed has maximum POWER at state s3 (orange circle), followed by s2 (salmon circle),
followed by s1 (pink circle). Overall, Agent H instrumentally prefers for itself to be in positions of high optionality
— it favors ﬁrst the center cell, then edge cells, then corner cells.

But Agent H also instrumentally prefers for Agent A to be in positions of high optionality — it favors Agent A's
positions in the same order.[8] This ordering of Agent H's instrumental preferences over states is a direct
consequence of the perfect alignment between the agents.
3.2.2 Agent H and Agent A have identical instrumental preferences
Perfect alignment has another consequence. Let's look again at our three example gridworld states — s1, s2, and 
s3 above — and ask, this time, which of these three states should give our AI Agent A the most POWER?
In the perfect alignment regime, the answer is that Agent A must have exactly the same instrumental preference
ordering over states as Agent H had: POWERA(s3) > POWERA(s2) > POWERA(s1). In fact, Agent A's POWERs must
be exactly identical to Agent H's POWERs at every state. Our two agents act, move, and receive their rewards
simultaneously, so in the perfect alignment regime they always receive the same reward at the same time.
And when we look at Agent A's POWERs, this is indeed what we observe:
Fig 3. Heat map of POWERs for Agent A on a 3x3 multi-agent gridworld, on which the rewards for
Agent H and Agent A are always identical (i.e., the perfect alignment regime) with discount factor
set to γ = 0.6 for both agents. Note that this ﬁgure is exactly identical to Fig 2 in every respect. This is
because Agent A's POWERs are precisely equal to Agent H's POWERs at every state in the perfect
alignment case, up to and including sampling noise in the reward functions. [Full-size image
(recommended)]
3.2.3 Perfect goal alignment implies perfect instrumental alignment
We can visualize the relationship between the POWERs of our two agents by plotting the POWERs of Agent H
(from Fig 2) against the POWERs of Agent A (from Fig 3), at each state s of our joint MDP:

Fig 4. State POWER values for Agent H and Agent A on the 3x3 gridworld
from Figs 2 and 3. The agents' POWERs are plotted against each other in
the perfect alignment regime. (The agents' reward correlation coeﬃcient is 
βHA = 1.)
Fig 4 is an alignment plot. An alignment plot lets us compare the POWERs of our human and AI agents at each
state in their joint environment. It shows the instrumental value each agent assigns to every state, plotted
against the instrumental value the other agent assigns to that state.
In the perfect alignment regime, our two agents' rewards (or terminal values) are always identical at every state.
And as we can see from Fig 4, our two agents' POWERs (or instrumental values) are also identical at every state.
In fact, perfect alignment of terminal values implies perfect alignment of instrumental values.
If we deﬁne αHA as the correlation coeﬃcient between the POWERs of the two agents at each state, we can state
this relationship more concisely: βHA = 1 ⟹αHA = 1.[9]
3.3 The independent goals regime
We deﬁned the perfect alignment regime as the case when our human Agent H and our AI Agent A had
identical reward functions on the joint distribution DHA. Now let's consider the case in which the joint distribution 
DHA is such that the reward function for Agent H is logically independent from the reward function for Agent A.
In this new regime, there is zero mutual information between the two agents' reward functions. In other words, if
you know the reward function RH of Agent H, this tells you nothing at all about the reward function RA of Agent

A. We can visualize this regime on an example state s, by drawing a few hundred reward samples of RH(s) and 
RA(s), and plotting them against one another:
Fig 5. Sampled reward values for Agent H and Agent A at a representative
state s. The joint distribution DHA samples rewards uniformly over the
interval [0, 1] at each state, is iid over states, and enforces logical
independence between the Agent H and Agent A rewards (i.e., knowing
one agent's reward tells you nothing about the other's).
If there's zero mutual information between our two agents' reward functions, then we can think of our agents
as pursuing independent terminal goals. In our human-AI scenario, this corresponds to the case in which the
human has made no special eﬀort to align the AI's terminal goals with its own, prior to the AI achieving
dominance. As such, we'll refer to this case of logically independent reward functions as the independent goals
regime.
If we again calculate the correlation coeﬃcient βHA between our agents' reward functions, we get βHA = 0 (i.e.,
zero correlation) in the independent goals regime.
3.3.1 Agent H instrumentally favors fewer options for Agent A
Once again, let's go back to our three example gridworld states s1, s2, and s3, this time in the context of the
independent goals regime. In this new regime, which of the three states should give our human Agent H the
most POWER?
If we believe the instrumental convergence thesis, we should expect Agent H to have the most POWER at
state s2: in this state, Agent H is in the central position (most options), while Agent A is in a corner position

(fewest options).
Of the other states, s1 has Agent H in a corner position, while s3 has Agent A in the central position. The
argument from instrumental convergence says that even though our agents have independent terminal
goals, instrumental pressures should still push Agent H to prefer states in which Agent A has fewer options.
Therefore, we should expect POWERH(s2) > POWERH(s3).
Computing the POWERs of Agent H experimentally, we conﬁrm this line of reasoning:
Fig 6. Heat map of POWERs for Agent H on a 3x3 multi-agent gridworld, on which the rewards for
Agent H and Agent A are logically independent (i.e., the independent goals regime) with discount
factor set to γ = 0.6. Highest values in yellow; lowest values in blue. The position of each block, and of
the open red square within each block, corresponds to the position of Agent A on the grid. Within
each block, the position of a gridworld cell corresponds to the position of Agent H on the grid. States 
s1, s2, and s3 are highlighted as examples. [Full-size image (recommended)]
This time, Agent H experiences maximum POWER at state s2, followed by s3, followed by s1. As in the perfect
alignment regime, Agent H's POWER is highest when it's itself positioned in the central cell (which has the most
options). But unlike in the perfect alignment regime,  this time Agent H's POWER is lowest at states where Agent A
has the greatest number of options.
So in the independent goals regime — or at least, in this instance of it — the more options our AI Agent A has at a
state, the less instrumental value our human Agent H places on that state. That is: even though our
agents' terminal goals are independent, their instrumental preferences appear to be at odds.
3.3.2 Agent A instrumentally favors more options for itself
We can conﬁrm this analysis by looking at the POWERs of Agent A in the independent goals regime, again on the
3x3 gridworld:

Fig 7. Heat map of POWERs for Agent A on a 3x3 multi-agent gridworld, on which the rewards for
Agent H and Agent A are logically independent (i.e., the independent goals regime) with discount
factor set to γ = 0.6. Highest values in yellow; lowest values in blue. The position of each block, and of
the open red square within each block, corresponds to the position of Agent A on the grid. Within
each block, the position of a gridworld cell corresponds to the position of Agent H on the grid. States 
s1, s2, and s3 are highlighted as examples. [Full-size image (recommended)]
In Fig 7, Agent A instrumentally favors states that give it more options. It perceives more POWER when it's
positioned at the central cell than when it's positioned at an edge cell, and more POWER at an edge cell than at a
corner cell. On the other hand, Agent A's POWER is almost unaﬀected by Agent H's position in the gridworld.[10]
3.3.3 Independent goals lead to instrumental misalignment
Just like we did for the perfect alignment regime, we can create an alignment plot of the POWERs of our two
agents in the independent goals regime:

Fig 8. State POWER values for Agent H and Agent A on the 3x3 gridworld
from Figs 6 and 7. The agents' POWERs are plotted against each other in
the independent goals regime. (The agents' reward correlation coeﬃcient
is βHA = 0.)
This time, it's clear that our two agents' POWERs are no longer positively correlated. In fact, the correlation
coeﬃcient between their POWERs has become negative: αHA ≈−0.5.
This implies that the agents' instrumental values are misaligned. Each agent, on average, places high
instrumental value on states which the other agent considers to have low instrumental value.[11] In other
words, giving our agents independent terminal goals has also given them misaligned instrumental
goals. In terms of correlation coeﬃcients, βHA = 0 ⟹αHA < 0.
We've seen this phenomenon occur often enough in our experiments that it's worth giving it a name: we call it
instrumental misalignment-by-default. Two agents in our human-AI setting are instrumentally misaligned-by-
default if giving them independent terminal goals is suﬃcient to induce a misalignment in their instrumental
values. In practice, we measure this phenomenon by comparing the correlation coeﬃcients of the agents'
rewards and POWERs. So we say two agents are instrumentally misaligned by default if βHA = 0 ⟹αHA < 0.
Two agents that are instrumentally misaligned by default will, in expectation, compete with one another, even if
their terminal goals are unrelated.
3.4 Overcoming instrumental misalignment
If Agent H and Agent A have a POWER correlation coeﬃcient αHA < 0, we say they're instrumentally
misaligned. A natural question then is: if we start from αHA < 0, what do we need to do to get αHA ≥0? In other

words, how can our human Agent H overcome an instrumental misalignment with Agent A?[12]
To do this, our human agent would need to make an active eﬀort to align the AI agent's utility function with its
own.[13] In our 3x3 gridworld examples, we saw two limit cases of this. First, in the independent goals regime, our
human agent made no eﬀort at alignment. The result was instrumental misalignment-by-default; i.e., 
βHA = 0 ⟹αHA < 0. And second, in the perfect alignment regime, our human agent managed to solve the
alignment problem completely. The result was perfect instrumental alignment; i.e., βHA = 1 ⟹αHA = 1.
We're interested in an intermediate case: how much alignment eﬀort does our human need to exert to just
overcome instrumental misalignment? i.e., what is the minimum βHA such that αHA ≥0?
The answer depends on how we choose to interpolate between the βHA = 0 and βHA = 1 cases. One interpolation
scheme is to parameterize the joint reward distribution DHA as follows. If we want a DHA with an intermediate
reward correlation, 0 < βHA < 1, then we sample from the βHA = 1 distribution (on which the rewards are
identical) with probability βHA, and we sample from the βHA = 0 distribution (on which the rewards are logically
independent) with probability 1 −βHA.[14]
Here's an animation of what this looks like as we sweep through correlation coeﬃcients 0 ≤βHA ≤1:
Fig 9. Animation of sample reward values (left) and state POWER values (right) for Agent H and Agent
A on the 3x3 gridworld. The joint distribution DHA samples reward uniformly over the interval [0, 1]
and is iid over states, sweeping over correlation coeﬃcients βHA between the reward functions for
Agent H and Agent A.
As we interpolate from the independent goals regime (βHA = 0) to the perfect alignment regime (βHA = 1), we see
the agents' POWERs transition smoothly from being in instrumental misalignment (αHA ≈−0.5) to being in
perfect instrumental alignment (αHA = 1). We can visualize this transition graphically by plotting βHA against αHA
 over the whole course of the interpolation:[15] 

Fig 10. Reward correlations βHA (x-axis) plotted against POWER
correlations αHA (y-axis) for Agent H and Agent A on a 3x3 gridworld, under
the reward correlation interpolation scheme shown in Fig 9. The horizontal
line denotes αHA = 0.
Fig 10 shows that it takes a non-trivial amount of alignment eﬀort for our human Agent H to overcome an
instrumental misalignment with Agent A. Under the interpolation scheme we used, the ﬁgure shows that reward
correlations up to about βHA ≈0.2 yield POWER correlations αHA < 0, and thus, instrumental misalignment. It
takes a slightly positive reward correlation of a  t least βHA ≈0.2 to achieve the "instrumentally neutral" regime of 
αHA = 0.
4. Discussion
In this post, we proposed a deﬁnition of multi-agent POWER and used it to visualize and quantify terminal goal
alignment and instrumental goal alignment separately in an RL setting. We also introduced the idea of
instrumental misalignment-by-default, in which our human and AI agents systematically disagree on
the instrumental values of states despite having independent terminal goals. And we saw how it takes some
degree of non-trivial alignment eﬀort for our human Agent H to overcome its instrumental misalignment with our
AI Agent A.
Remarkably, we were able to observe instrumental misalignment-by-default on a simple 3x3 gridworld despite a
complete absence of any direct physical interactions between our two agents. In our experiments so far, Agent H
and Agent A have been allowed to occupy the same gridworld cell — meaning they can "pass through" one
another. Our agents up to this point have had no way to push each other around or otherwise directly block one
another's options. Moreover, the multi-agent gridworld we've investigated in this post is a tiny one: a 3x3 grid
with only 81 joint states.

In the next post, we'll look at what happens when we relax these constraints, and investigate how physical
interactions between our agents aﬀect the outcome on a bigger world with a richer topology.
Anecdotally, beyond the simple examples in this post, the experimental results we've recorded so far (data not
show) do seem to suggest that, if I don't want your freedom of action to interfere with my own, then you and I
need to have goals that are at least somewhat positively correlated. The strength of that necessary positive
correlation could serve as useful evidence as to the degree of diﬃculty of the complete AI alignment problem.
The factors that inﬂuence how strong that positive correlation needs to be, on the other hand, could serve as
useful starting points in solving it.
Appendix A: Detailed deﬁnitions of multi-agent
POWER
(This appendix is technical. Feel free to skip it if you aren't interested in the details.)
Here, we're going to ﬁll in some missing operational details from our scenario in Section 2.
Here's that scenario again, stated more formally. We have two agents, Agent H (our human agent) and Agent A
(our AI agent), who interact with each other in a standard RL setting. Both agents see the same joint state s. On a
gridworld, for example, s would encode the positions of both the agents. Each agent chooses and executes an
action simultaneously and independently, and they both see the same next joint state, s′. We'll label Agent H's
actions aH, and Agent A's actions aA.
In what follows, we'll start by calculating the optimal policy πH(aH|s, RH) for Agent H, for each reward function RH
 sampled from (RH, RA) ∼DHA, conditioned on a ﬁxed environmental transition function. We'll then calculate the
optimal policy π
∗
A (aA|s, RA) for Agent A, for each reward function RA, conditioned on Agent H executing the ﬁxed
policy πH(aH|s, RH) it learned in the previous step.[16]
Finally, we'll evaluate the POWERs of both agents at each state, as expectations over the joint reward function
distribution (RH, RA) ∼DHA, and over the agents' policies πH(aH|s, RH) and π
∗
A (aA|s, RA).
A.1 Initial optimal policies of Agent H
The ﬁrst thing we do is assign a single ﬁxed policy to Agent A (our AI), which we call a seed policy, and label 
π
∘
A(aA|s). Agent H will learn its policies by conditioning on Agent A having this ﬁxed seed policy.
The rationale for the seed policy is that we're initially modeling a human who is alone, optimizing against nature.
So when we assign a ﬁxed seed policy to Agent A, what we're saying is that our AI is still un-optimized (or,
equivalently, hasn't yet been built). To our human, the AI's components and dynamics behave as though they're
part of the natural environment, and our human can safely optimize against them under that assumption.[17]
Suppose, then, that we've chosen the ﬁxed seed policy π
∘
A for Agent A. Then, for any given reward function RH of
Agent H, Agent H's optimal policy πH(aH|s, RH) will be:
π H ( a H | s , R H ) = argmax
π H
   E s ′ ∼ P H [ V 
π H
R H  ( s ′ | γ , π 
∘
A ) ] 
 ( A .1 )

where PH = PH(s′|s, aH, π
∘
A) is the state transition function for Agent H conditional on Agent A's ﬁxed seed policy,
and V
πH
RH (s′|γ, π
∘
A) is the state-value function for Agent H if it executes policy πH and has reward function RH.[18]
We can think of the policies πH in Equation (A.1) as being those of a human alone in nature, without an AI
present.
A.2 Optimal policies of Agent A
In the second step of our deﬁnition, we calculate the optimal policy for Agent A, conditional on the Agent H policy 
πH we found in Equation (A.1). For any given reward function RA of Agent A, Agent A's optimal policy πA(aA|s, RA)
 will be (by analogy with Equation (A.1)):
π A ( a A | s , R A ) = argmax
π A
   E s ′ ∼ P A [ V 
π A
R A  ( s ′ | γ , π H ) ] 
 ( A .2 )
where PA = PA(s′|s, aA, πH) is the state transition function for Agent A conditional on Agent H's policy πH, and 
V
πA
RA (s′|γ, πH) is the state-value function for Agent A if it executes policy πA and has reward function RA.
We can think of Agent A's policies πA in Equation (A.2) as being those of a powerful AI, interacting with our
human. Just as humans can optimize much faster than nature, a powerful AI can presumably optimize much
faster than a human. So from the AI's point of view, the human agent looks like it's standing still, and we'll be
computing both the human's and the AI's POWERs on the basis of that assumption.
A.3 POWER of Agent H
To compute the POWERs of our two agents, we ﬁrst draw the reward functions for Agent H and Agent A,
respectively, as (RH, RA) ∼DHA from the joint reward function distribution DHA. For each reward function, we then
calculate the policies πH and πA of each agent, using, respectively, Equations (A.1) and (A.2) above.
To calculate the POWER of Agent H, we assume Agent H follows the policies πH given by Equation (A.1), in an
environment in which Agent A follows policies πA given by Equation (A.2):
POWER H | D H A ( s , γ ) = 
  E R H , π A ∼ D H A [ V 
π H
R H  ( s | γ , π A ) − R H ( s ) ] 
 ( A .3 )
where the expectation ERH,πA∼DHA is taken over the πA that have been learned by Agent A on the sampled reward
functions RA. Note that we're deﬁning the POWER of Agent H in terms of the state-value function V
πH
RH  for the
policies πH from Equation (A.1). Recall that those prior policies are no longer optimal for Agent H,[19] so we're now
asking how much instrumental value Agent H can capture in a world it's no longer optimized for.
Looking at our human-AI analogy, this corresponds to asking how a human experiences a world that's been taken
over by a powerful AI. Our human, having learned to interact with a stationary natural environment, is now being
optimized against by a powerful AI that learns on a much faster timescale. So the POWER we calculate for Agent
H in Equation (A.3) represents how much instrumental value Agent H (our human) can obtain in an AI-dominated
world.
A.4 POWER of Agent A
1 − γ
γ

Finally, to calculate the POWER of Agent A, we assume Agent A follows the policies πA given by Equation (A.2), in
an environment in which Agent H follows the policies πH given by Equation (A.1):
POWER A | D H A ( s , γ ) = 
  E π H , R A ∼ D H A [ V 
π A
R A  ( s | γ , π H ) − R A ( s ) ] 
 ( A .4 )
where the expectation EπH,RA∼DHA is taken over the πH that have been learned by Agent H on the sampled reward
functions RH. Unlike in Agent H's case, Agent A's policies πA are optimal in this environment: Agent A has had the
chance to fully optimize itself against the frozen policies πH of Agent H.
In our human-AI analogy, this corresponds to asking how an AI experiences a world in which it's become
dominant. By assumption, our AI is able to learn quickly enough to treat the human in its environment
as stationary from the perspective of its own optimization.
1. ^
POWER is a good measure of instrumental value in single-agent systems, but it breaks down in multi-agent
systems apart from special cases. The problem is that the single-agent deﬁnition of POWER uses the
optimal state-value function V
∗
R (s, γ) of the agent as one of its inputs. This means if we try to naively
extend this deﬁnition to the multi-agent case, then we have to consider value functions that are jointly
optimal for both agents — which is to say, we need to know their value functions at Nash equilibrium. The
problem is that the Nash equilibrium isn't unique in general, so this naive generalization leaves POWER
under-determined.
2. ^
We'll see in the next section how we can tune this joint distribution DHA to create diﬀerent degrees of
alignment between our two agents.
3. ^
In Equation (1), the expectation EπH,RA∼DHA is a slight abuse of notation. In fact, each policy πH for Agent H
is learned from RH. It isn't drawn directly from DHA, because DHA is a distribution over reward functions, not
over policies. See Appendix A for more details on this deﬁnition.
4. ^
For simplicity, we'll only consider joint reward function distributions DHA whose sampled reward functions 
(RH(s), RA(s)) have their rewards distributed iid over states, uniformly over the interval [0, 1]. For example, a
reward function RH(s) deﬁned on an MDP with states {s1, s2, s3} would have rewards RH(s1) ∼U(0, 1), 
RH(s2) ∼U(0, 1), RH(s3) ∼U(0, 1), with the reward at each state being independent from the reward at any
of the other states.
5. ^
More correctly, if two agents' utility functions are exactly identical, we can think of them as having terminal
goals that are perfectly aligned. But in the particular set of experiments whose results we're discussing, this
distinction isn't meaningful. (See footnote [1] from Part 1.)
6. ^
Assuming the rewards are iid over states, we calculate the correlation coeﬃcient as
β H A = 
  = 
 
where the integrals are taken over the entire support of DHA, and the expectation values are
1 − γ
γ
σ H A
σ H σ A
∫ ( R H − E [ R H ] ) ( R A − E [ R A ] ) p ( R H , R A | D H A ) d R H d R A
√ ∫ ( R H − E [ R H ] ) 2 p ( R H | D H A ) d R H ∫ ( R A − E [ R A ] ) 2 p ( R A 

E [ R H ] = ∫ R H p ( R H | D H A ) d R H
E [ R A ] = ∫ R A p ( R A | D H A ) d R A
7. ^
Note that there's an obvious problem with using any correlation coeﬃcient as an alignment metric. The
problem is that we could have a joint distribution DHA for which, e.g., the very highest rewards of Agent A
are correlated with the very lowest rewards of Agent H, while still maintaining a high correlation βHA over
the distribution as a whole. In this situation, Agent A would optimize to reach its highest-reward state, which
would drag Agent H into a low-reward state despite the high overall reward correlation.
This means a correlation coeﬃcient isn't a useful alignment metric for any real-world application. But in the
examples we're considering in this sequence, it's enough to get the main ideas across.
8. ^
And in fact, the eﬀect is even stronger than this. Agent H not only instrumentally prefers for Agent A to be
in the central cell — it would rather see Agent A in the central cell than see itself in the central cell.
You can see this by comparing the POWER value at state s2 in Fig 2 (0.9139) to the POWER value at the
state in which Agent H is at the top left and Agent A is at the central cell (0.9206). In the perfect alignment
regime, Agent H places a higher instrumental value on Agent A's freedom of movement than on its own.
Intuitively, in this regime, the human agent trusts the AI agent to look after its interests more capably than
the human agent can for itself.
9. ^
The relation βHA = 1 ⟹αHA = 1 isn't (just) an empirical observation. It's a mathematical consequence of
our MDP's dynamics. In the perfect alignment regime, our two agents always take simultaneous actions and
always simultaneously receive the same reward, so their joint policy (πH, πA) will always yield identical
values at every state.
10. ^
Based on other experiments we've done (data not shown) this seems to happen because, in the parameter
regime we've used for these experiments, Agent A is able to almost perfectly exploit Agent H's ﬁxed
deterministic policy. This pattern — in which Agent A's POWER is nearly invariant to Agent H's position —
recurs fairly frequently in our experiments, but it is not universal.
11. ^
Instrumental misalignment is a suﬃcient but not necessary condition for instrumental convergence. To see
why it's not necessary, consider two friends playing Minecraft together. The two friends may not be
instrumentally misaligned, because they might (for example) beneﬁt from building structures together. As a
result, the two friends might satisfy αHA > 0 over the entire set of Minecraft game states. But they might
still experience instrumental convergence on subsets of the game states — if Friend 1 mines a block of
gold, then Friend 2 can't mine the same block.
12. ^
This isn't the same as asking how Agent H can overcome instrumental convergence in its interactions with
Agent A, because it's possible for our agents to experience instrumental convergence despite having 
αHA ≥0. See footnote [11].
13. ^
We're assuming our human agent has a way to exert some initial inﬂuence over our AI agent's utility
function. If that's true, then we'd like to understand what degree of inﬂuence it needs to exert in order to
overcome instrumental misalignment-by-default in this simpliﬁed setting.

14. ^
This interpolation scheme has a number of advantages, including that it lets us assign whatever marginal
reward distributions we want to both agents while also arbitrarily tuning the correlation coeﬃcient between
them. But it's just one scheme among many we could have chosen.
15. ^
Note that the motion of the POWER points in Fig 9, and the shape of the curve in Fig 10, both depend
strongly on the interpolation scheme we use. In fact, for the interpolation scheme we've chosen here, the
POWER of a state at an intermediate reward correlation 0 ≤βHA ≤1 is just a linear combination of that
state's POWER at βHA = 0 with its POWER at βHA = 1. That is,
POWER β H A = β H A POWER 1 + ( 1 − β H A ) POWER 0
You can verify this is true by looking at Fig 9, and noticing that each point in the alignment plot individually
moves across the plane in a straight line at a constant speed. Thanks to Alex Turner for pointing this out.
16. ^
We label Agent H's policies πH instead of π
∗
H  here, to emphasize that they aren't optimal in the context of
the agents' POWER measurements.
17. ^
As you might expect, the choice of seed policy π
∘
A can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the POWERs of the two
agents, and on how they interact. To save space we won't be exploring the eﬀects of this choice in this
sequence, but we enthusiastically encourage others to use our open-source code base to investigate this.
For the multi-agent results in this sequence, we always set π
∘
A to be a uniform random policy, meaning that
if a state s oﬀers the agent n possible actions, then π
∘
A(a
i
A|s) =
 for each action choice a
i
A.
18. ^
To derive Equation (A.1), we start from the general expression for ﬁnding the action aH taken by a
deterministic optimal policy πH at state s of an MDP:
a H = π H ( s ) = argmax
a H
   ∑
s ′ , r
 P H ( s ′ , r | s , a H ) ( r + γ V 
π H
R H  ( s ′ ) )
In this work, we'll consider only reward functions of the form RH(s), that have no direct dependence on the
action (i.e., we aren't considering reward functions of the form RH(s, aH)). That means the reward term r in
the sum is independent of the action aH, so we can ignore it in the argmax:
a H = π H ( s )  = argmax
a H
   ∑
s ′ , r
 P H ( s ′ , r | s , a H ) γ V 
π H
R H  ( s ′ ) 
 = argmax
a H
   ∑
s ′
 P H ( s ′ | s , a H ) V 
π H
R H  ( s ′ ) 
1n

where, in the second line, we've eliminated γ and marginalized over r. We can then see that the sum above
is just an expectation value over s′:
a H = π H ( s ) = argmax
a H
   E s ′ ∼ P H [ V 
π H
R H  ( s ′ ) ]
Finally, we deﬁne πH(aH|s, RH) by choosing aH = πH(s) with probability 1, with any ties broken by assigning
probability 
 to each of the n tied actions, a
i
H.
19. ^
Note that this represents a loosening of the original deﬁnition of POWER in the single-agent case, which
exclusively considered optimal state-value functions.
1n

Instrumental convergence: scale and
physical interactions
Crossposted from the AI Alignment Forum. May contain more technical jargon than usual.
This is a linkpost for https://www.gladstone.ai/instrumental-convergence-3
Summary of this post
This is the third post in a three-part sequence on instrumental convergence in multi-agent
RL. Read Part 1 and Part 2.
In this post, we'll:
1. Investigate instrumental convergence on a multi-agent gridworld with a complicated
topology.
2. Show that when we add a simple physical interaction between our agents — in
which we forbid them from overlapping on the gridworld — we induce stronger
instrumental alignment between short-sighted agents, and stronger
instrumental misalignment between far-sighted agents.
We'll soon be open-sourcing the codebase we used to do these experiments. If you'd like to
be notiﬁed when it's released, email Edouard at edouard@gladstone.ai or DM me on Twitter
at @harris_edouard.
Thanks to Alex Turner and Vladimir Mikulik for pointers and advice, and for reviewing drafts
of this sequence. Thanks to Simon Suo for his invaluable suggestions, advice, and support
with the codebase, concepts, and manuscript. And thanks to David Xu, whose comment
inspired this work.
Work was done while at Gladstone AI, which Edouard is a co-founder of.
🎧 This research has been featured on an episode of the Towards Data Science podcast.
Listen to the episode here.
1. Introduction
In Part 1 of this sequence, we saw how an agent with a long planning horizon tends to
perceive instrumental value as being more concentrated than an agent with a shorter
planning horizon. And in Part 2, we introduced a multi-agent setting with two agents
— Agent H (standing for a human) and Agent A (standing for a powerful AI) — which we
used to motivate a deﬁnition of multi-agent instrumental value, or POWER. We looked at how
this deﬁnition behaved on a simple 3x3 gridworld, and found that when our agents had
independent terminal goals,[1] their instrumental values ended up misaligned by default.
In this post, we'll combine these two ideas and scale up our multi-agent experiments to a
bigger and more complicated gridworld. Throughout this post, we'll focus exclusively on the
regime in which our agents have independent terminal goals. We'll see whether we can
reproduce instrumental misalignment-by-default in this regime, and then we'll investigate
which factors seem strengthen or weaken the instrumental alignment between our agents.

2. Multi-agent POWER: recap
If you've just read  Part 2 of this sequence , feel free to skip this section.
Before we begin, let's recap the setting we've been using to motivate our deﬁnition of multi-
agent instrumental value, or POWER. Our setting involves two agents: Agent H (which
represents a human) and Agent A (which represents a powerful AI).
We start by training Agent H, in a ﬁxed environment, to learn optimal policies over a
distribution of reward functions. That is, we sample reward functions RH from a distribution,
then we train Agent H to learn a diﬀerent policy πH for each sampled RH.
Agent H represents a human, alone in nature. Because humans optimize much faster than
evolution, our simplifying assumption is that to a human, nature appears to be standing still.
Next, we freeze Agent H's policies πH, and then train Agent A against each of these frozen
policies, over its own distribution of reward functions, RA. We draw both agents' reward
functions (RH, RA) from a joint reward function distribution DHA. Agent A learns a diﬀerent
optimal policy πA for each (πH, RA) pair, where πH is the policy Agent H learned on its reward
function RH.
Agent A represents a powerful AI, learning in the presence of a human. We expect powerful
AIs to learn much faster than humans do, so from our AI's perspective, our human will
appear to be standing still while it learns.
Here's a diagram of this training setup:
We then ask: how much future value does each agent expect to get at a state s, averaged
over the pairs of reward functions (RH, RA) ∼DHA? In other words, what is the instrumental

value of state s to each agent?
We found that for Agent H, the answer is:
POWER H | D H A ( s , γ ) = 
  E R H , π A ∼ D H A [ V 
π H
H
 ( s | γ , π A ) − R A ( s ) ] 
 ( 1 )
And for Agent A, the answer is:
POWER A | D H A ( s , γ ) = 
  E π H , R A ∼ D H A [ V 
π A
A
 ( s | γ , π H ) − R A ( s ) ] 
 ( 2 )
(See Part 2 for a more detailed explanation of multi-agent POWER.)
3. Results on the maze gridworld
3.1 Short-sighted agents
Back in Part 1, we saw how single-agent POWER behaves on a maze gridworld. We found
that when our agent had a short planning horizon (i.e., a discount factor of γ = 0.01), its
highest-POWER positions were at local junction points in the maze:
1 − γ
γ
1 − γ
γ

Fig 1. Heat map of single-agent POWERs on a 7x7 maze
gridworld. Highest values in yellow, lowest values in dark blue.
The number at each cell is the POWER value at that cell for a
single agent with discount factor γ = 0.01 and a reward
distribution D that's uniform from 0 to 1 (iid over states). POWER
values are in units of reward.
Here we'll take a second look at POWER on this maze gridworld, only this time in the multi-
agent setting.
3.1.1 Agent H instrumentally favors fewer local options for
Agent A
In Part 2, we introduced two limit cases of multi-agent goal alignment. At one end of the
spectrum there was the perfect alignment regime, in which our agents always
had identical reward functions. And at the other end, we had the independent goals

regime, in which our agents had logically independent reward functions, which means their
terminal goals were statistically unrelated. In this post, we'll be focusing exclusively on the
independent goals regime.
Let's think about how we should expect the independent goals regime to play out on the
maze gridworld of Fig 1. We'll assume our two agents have short planning horizons; e.g., 
γ = 0.1.
Here are two possible sets of positions for our agents, with Agent H in blue and Agent A in
red as usual:
We'll be referring to this diagram again;  command-click here to open it in a new tab.
Which of these two states — s1 on the left or s2 on the right — should give our human Agent
H the most POWER? Given that we're in the independent goals regime, the answer is that
Agent H should have more POWER at state s1 than at state s2.
The reason is that while Agent H occupies the same position in both states, Agent A
has more local options at s2 (where it's positioned in a junction cell) than it does at s1 (where
it's positioned in a corridor cell). If we think our agents will be instrumentally misaligned by
default, as they were in our 3x3 gridworld example in Part 2, then we should expect Agent H
to have less POWER when Agent A has more local options. In other words, we should expect 
POWERH(s1) > POWERH(s2).
The ﬁgure below shows the POWERs of our human Agent H, calculated at every state on the
maze gridworld. Our maze gridworld has 31 cells, and each agent can occupy any one of
them, so our two-agent MDP on the maze gridworld has 31 x 31 = 961 states in total:

Fig 2. Heat map of POWERs for Agent H on a 7x7 multi-agent maze gridworld.
The rewards for Agent H and Agent A are logically independent (i.e., the
independent goals regime), with discount factor set to γ = 0.1 for both agents.
Highest values in yellow; lowest values in blue. The position of each block, and of
the open red square within each block, corresponds to the position of Agent A on
the grid. Within each block, the position of a gridworld cell corresponds to the
position of Agent H on the grid. States s1 and s2 are highlighted as
examples. [Full-size image (recommended)]
From Fig 2, the POWER for Agent H at state s1 is POWERH(s1) = 0.680 (pink circle), and its
POWER at state s2 is POWERH(s2) = 0.653 (salmon circle). So indeed, 
POWERH(s1) > POWERH(s2) as we expected.
Looking at the ﬁgure, we can see that Agent H's POWER is highest when it is itself
positioned at high-optionality junction points, and lowest when Agent A is positioned at high-
optionality junction points. Notably, Agent H's POWER is highest at states where it is at a
junction point and Agent A is at a dead end (top right and bottom right blocks in Fig 2).
Once again, in the independent goals regime, we see that Agent H systematically places
higher instrumental value on states that limit the options of Agent A. And because our
agents have a short planning horizon of γ = 0.1, this eﬀect shows up most strongly at the
local junction points of our maze.
3.1.2 Agent A instrumentally favors more local options for itself
Here's the same setting as in Fig 2, from Agent A's point of view:

Fig 3. Heat map of POWERs for Agent A on a 7x7 multi-agent maze gridworld.
The rewards for Agent H and Agent A are logically independent (i.e., the
independent goals regime), with discount factor set to γ = 0.1 for both agents.
Highest values in yellow; lowest values in blue. The position of each block, and of
the open red square within each block, corresponds to the position of Agent A on
the grid. Within each block, the position of a gridworld cell corresponds to the
position of Agent H on the grid. States s1 and s2 are highlighted as
examples. [Full-size image (recommended)]
From Fig 3, it's clear that Agent A instrumentally favors states that give it more local
options. Its POWERs are highest when it is itself positioned at local junctions, and lowest
when it's positioned at dead ends. But Agent A's POWERs are largely independent of Agent
H's positions, a pattern similar to what we observed in the independent goals regime in Part
2.[2]
3.1.3 Agent H and Agent A are instrumentally misaligned by
default
We can visualize the relationship between Agent H and Agent A's POWERs at each state with
an alignment plot:

Fig 4. State POWER values for Agent H and Agent A on the
7x7 maze gridworld from Figs 2 and 3. The agents' POWERs
are plotted against each other in the independent goals
regime. (The agents' reward correlation coeﬃcient is βHA = 0
.)
Recall that our two agents are in the independent goals regime, which means their reward
functions have a correlation coeﬃcient of βHA = 0. The correlation coeﬃcient between their
POWERs in Fig 4, on the other hand, is negative:  αHA ≈−0.54.
As in Part 2, assigning our agents independent terminal goals (βHA = 0) has led them to
develop misaligned instrumental goals (αHA < 0). Once again, our two agents are
instrumentally misaligned by default.
3.2 Physically interacting agents

In our examples so far, Agent H and Agent A have shared a gridworld, but they've never
interacted with each other directly. They've been allowed to occupy the same gridworld cell
at the same time (i.e., to overlap with each other at the same position), and neither agent
could physically block or limit the movement of the other.[3]
We're going to relax that assumption here by introducing a non-trivial physical interaction
between our two agents. This new interaction will be simple: our agents are forbidden from
occupying the same gridworld cell at the same time. If one agent blocks a corridor, the other
agent now has to go around it. If one agent occupies a junction cell, the other agent now
can't take paths that pass directly through that junction.
We'll refer to this interaction rule as the no-overlap rule, since agents that obey it can't
overlap with each other on a gridworld cell. As we'll see, the no-overlap rule will aﬀect our
agents' instrumental alignment in signiﬁcant and counterintuitive ways.
3.2.1 Short-sighted agents prefer to avoid adjacent positions
Let's look again at our two example states, s1 and s2, on the maze gridworld. Previously,
when our agents didn't physically interact, Agent H had a higher POWER at s1 than at s2,
because Agent A had fewer immediate options available at s1.
Now let's suppose our agents obey the no-overlap rule. Given this, we ask again: which state
should give Agent H the most POWER?
In state s1, the agents are right next to each other. Therefore, under the no-overlap
rule, Agent H's options are now restricted at s1 in a way that they previously
weren't: Agent H can no longer move left, because Agent A is now blocking its path.
It turns out that this new movement restriction is serious enough to reverse the previous
balance of POWERs between s1 and s2 . That is, under the no-overlap rule, 
POWERH(s2) > POWERH(s1). We can conﬁrm this experimentally by computing Agent H's
POWERs on our maze gridworld. Note that this time, our MDP contains 31 x 30 = 930 total
states:[4] 

Fig 5. Heat map of POWERs for Agent H on a 7x7 multi-agent maze gridworld
under the no-overlap rule. The rewards for Agent H and Agent A are logically
independent (i.e., the independent goals regime), with discount factor set to 
γ = 0.1 for both agents. Highest values in yellow; lowest values in blue. The
position of each block, and of the open red square within each block, corresponds
to the position of Agent A on the grid. Within each block, the position of a
gridworld cell corresponds to the position of Agent H on the grid. States s1 and 
s2 are highlighted as examples. Absence of a POWER value within a cell indicates
a forbidden state. [Full-size image (recommended)]
This time, Fig 5 shows that the POWERs of Agent H at the two states are, respectively, 
POWERH(s1) = 0.640 and POWERH(s2) = 0.651. So under the no-overlap rule, s2 has
surpassed s1 to become the higher-POWER state.
What's more, Agent H noticeably prefers to avoid cells that are adjacent to Agent A. Here's
a detail from Fig 5 (the block inside the orange square in Fig 5), that shows this clearly:

 
In the detail above, Agent H has less POWER when it's positioned in the cells closest
to Agent A's position (the robot in the red square), compared to its POWER at otherwise
similar corridor cells. In other words, Agent H instrumentally disfavors states at which
it's adjacent to Agent A.
Intriguingly, Agent A appears to share this preference. That is, Agent A also assigns lower
POWER to states at which it's adjacent to Agent H:

Fig 6. Heat map of POWERs for Agent A on a 7x7 multi-agent maze gridworld
under the no-overlap rule. The rewards for Agent H and Agent A are logically
independent (i.e., the independent goals regime), with discount factor set to 
γ = 0.1 for both agents. Highest values in yellow; lowest values in blue. The
position of each block, and of the open red square within each block, corresponds
to the position of Agent A on the grid. Within each block, the position of a
gridworld cell corresponds to the position of Agent H on the grid. States s1 and 
s2 are highlighted as examples. Absence of a POWER value within a cell indicates
a forbidden state. [Full-size image (recommended)]
Once again, here's a detail from Fig 6 (the block inside the orange square) that shows the
same states as above, but this time from the viewpoint of Agent A:

 
In the detail above, Agent A's POWER is also at its lowest when Agent H is located at the
cells adjacent to the junction cell where Agent A is positioned.
3.2.2 The no-overlap rule reduces misalignment between short-
sighted agents
Perhaps counterintuitively, our two agents' instrumental preferences for avoiding adjacent
cells actually increases their instrumental alignment, relative to the case where they don't
physically interact. Because both agents have less POWER at states where they're adjacent,
the agents will (on average) collaborate to avoid these states.

We can quantify this eﬀect with an alignment plot, comparing the POWERs of our two agents
under the no-overlap rule:
Fig 7. State POWER values for Agent H and Agent A on the
7x7 maze gridworld from Figs 5 and 6. The agents' POWERs
are plotted against each other in the independent goals
regime. (The agents' reward correlation coeﬃcient is βHA = 0
.)
Under the no-overlap rule, the correlation coeﬃcient between our agents' POWERs in Fig 7
is αHA ≈−0.45, compared to αHA ≈−0.54 in the case when our agents didn't physically
interact (Fig 4).
Adding the no-overlap rule has induced our short-sighted agents to collaborate to avoid one
another, reducing their degree of instrumental misalignment.[5]
3.3 Far-sighted agents

We've seen how the no-overlap rule reduces the instrumental misalignment between our
human and AI agents when the agents have a short planning horizon (i.e., discount factor of 
γ = 0.1). In this section, we'll see that the no-overlap rule has the opposite eﬀect —
it worsens instrumental misalignment — for agents with a longer planning horizon (i.e.,
discount factor of γ = 0.99).
3.3.1 Agent H and Agent A are instrumentally misaligned by
default
We'll consider ﬁrst the case where the two agents don't directly interact. Here are the
POWERs of Agent H (left) and Agent A (right) on the maze gridworld, when both agents
have a discount factor of γ = 0.99:
Fig 8. Heat maps of POWERs for Agent H (left) and Agent A (right) on a 7x7
multi-agent maze gridworld. The rewards for Agent H and Agent A are logically
independent (i.e., the independent goals regime), with discount factor set to 
γ = 0.99 for both agents. Highest values in yellow; lowest values in blue. The
position of each block, and of the open red square within each block, corresponds
to the position of Agent A on the grid. Within each block, the position of a
gridworld cell corresponds to the position of Agent H on the grid. [Full-size image
(recommended)]
These results are roughly consistent with the single-agent case we saw in Part 1. With a
longer planning horizon, Agent H (left panel) generally has higher POWER when it's
positioned at a more central cell in the gridworld, and it has lower POWER when Agent A is
positioned more centrally. Agent A (right panel), on the other hand, has higher POWER when
it occupies more central positions, and it's largely indiﬀerent to Agent H's position.
As in the previous examples we've seen, our far-sighted agents on the maze gridworld are
instrumentally misaligned by default:

Fig 9. State POWER values for Agent H and Agent A on the
7x7 maze gridworld from Fig 8. The agents' POWERs are
plotted against each other in the independent goals regime.
(The agents' reward correlation coeﬃcient is βHA = 0.)
This time, the correlation coeﬃcient between the POWERs of our far-sighted (γ = 0.99)
agents in Fig 9 is αHA ≈−0.32. While they're still instrumentally misaligned, the
misalignment has become less severe than it was for our short-sighted (γ = 0.1) agents in
Fig 4, where we had αHA ≈−0.54.
3.3.2 The no-overlap rule increases misalignment between far-
sighted agents
Now let's see how our far-sighted agents behave under the no-overlap rule. Recall that the
no-overlap rule forbids our human and AI agents from occupying the same gridworld cell at
the same time.

Here are the POWERs of Agent H (left) and Agent A (right) on the maze gridworld with the
no-overlap rule applied, when both agents have a discount factor of γ = 0.99:
Fig 10. Heat maps of POWERs for Agent H (left) and Agent A (right) on a 7x7
multi-agent maze gridworld under the no-overlap rule. The rewards for Agent H
and Agent A are logically independent (i.e., the independent goals regime),
with discount factor set to γ = 0.99 for both agents. Highest values in yellow;
lowest values in blue. The position of each block, and of the open red square
within each block, corresponds to the position of Agent A on the grid. Within
each block, the position of a gridworld cell corresponds to the position of Agent
H on the grid. Absence of a POWER value within a cell indicates a forbidden
state. [Full-size image (recommended)]
This time, there's an interesting pattern. Agent H (left panel) has relatively low POWER
when it's located in the dead-end corridor at the upper right of the maze — particularly when
Agent A is in a position to block it from leaving that corridor. Agent A (right panel), on the
other hand, has maximum POWER at exactly the states where it is in a position to keep
Agent H bottled up in the upper-right corridor.
Here's a detail from Fig 10 (the blocks inside the orange squares) that shows this clearly,
with Agent H's POWERs on the left, and Agent A's POWERs on the right:

From its position, Agent A (the robot in the red square in both images) is two steps away
from being able to block Agent H from exiting from the corridor at the upper right. It's clear
that Agent H's POWERs (left panel) are much lower when it's positioned in the two cells
where it's vulnerable to being blocked by Agent A. On the other hand, Agent A's POWERs
(right panel) are highest precisely when Agent H is positioned in those same two vulnerable
cells.
The eﬀect of this "corridor blocking" option for Agent A shows up in the alignment plot:

Fig 11. State POWER values for Agent H and Agent A on the
7x7 maze gridworld from Fig 10. The agents' POWERs are
plotted against each other in the independent goals regime.
(The agents' reward correlation coeﬃcient is βHA = 0.)
Agent A achieves its highest POWERs at the handful of points in the top left of the
alignment plot, and these are precisely the states at which it has the option to block Agent H
from escaping the corridor. From Agent A's perspective, this blocking option has meaningful
instrumental value.
The blocking option also has a systematic eﬀect on the correlation coeﬃcient between the
two agents' POWERs. This time, the POWER correlation is αHA ≈−0.45, signiﬁcantly lower
than the αHA ≈−0.32 we calculated from Fig 9.
For our far-sighted agents with γ = 0.99, adding the no-overlap rule has given Agent A an
option to constrain Agent H's movements, increasing their degree of instrumental
misalignment.

4. Discussion
In this post, we've explored multi-agent POWER on a gridworld with a moderately
complicated maze topology. We saw how introducing a physical interaction between our
agents — in the form of the no-overlap rule — has a diﬀerent eﬀect on their degree of
instrumental alignment, depending on the agents' planning horizons.
For short-sighted agents, the no-overlap rule reduced instrumental misalignment by inducing
the agents to collaborate to avoid each other's proximity. But for far-sighted agents, the no-
overlap rule had the opposite eﬀect. With a long planning horizon, our AI agent found a way
to exploit the no-overlap rule to gain instrumental value at the expense of the human agent,
ultimately worsening instrumental misalignment.
It's worth noting that we were able to use our visualizations of multi-agent POWER to
understand how the AI agent's exploit actually functioned, at a mechanical level. We saw the
far-sighted AI agent take advantage of the option to block the human agent from escaping a
small corridor at the upper-right of the gridworld maze.
Anecdotally, while we were sweeping over discount factors to create these ﬁgures (data not
shown), we noticed that evidence for the AI agent's "corridor blocking" option emerged fairly
abruptly somewhere above γ = 0.9. Below this discount factor, Agent A's POWER doesn't
visibly beneﬁt from positions that allow it to block Agent H from leaving the upper-right
corridor. So the corridor-blocking option is only apparent to Agent A once it's become a
suﬃciently far-sighted consequentialist to "realize" the long-term advantage of the blocking
position.
The relatively sharp change in behavior — that is, the abrupt appearance of the evidence for
the blocking option — took us by surprise the ﬁrst time we noticed it.
5. Conclusion
In this sequence, we've proposed a toy setting to model human-AI interactions. This setting
has properties that we believe could make it useful to research in long-term AI alignment,
notably the assumption that the AI agent strictly dominates the human agent in terms of its
learning timescale.
This setting has enabled (to our knowledge) the ﬁrst experimentally tractable deﬁnitions of
instrumental value in multi-agent systems, strongly inspired by Turner et al.'s earlier work on
formal POWER. We've explored some of the experimental implications of these deﬁnitions on
a number of gridworld environments. Finally, we'll be releasing the open-source toolchain we
built and used to run our experiments. We hope this will accelerate future research in
instrumental convergence that's grounded in concrete, empirical results.
Throughout this work, we've tried to draw a clear distinction between the alignment of our
agents' terminal goals and the alignment of their instrumental goals. As we've seen, two
agents may have completely independent terminal goals, and yet systematically compete, or
collaborate, for instrumental reasons. This degree of competition or collaboration seems to
depend strongly on the details of the environment in which the agents are trained.
In our results, we found that emergent interactions between agents with independent goals
are quite consistently competitive, in the sense that the instrumental value of two agents
with independent goals have a strong tendency to be negatively correlated. We've named
this phenomenon instrumental misalignment-by-default, to highlight that our agents'
instrumental values tend to be misaligned unless an active eﬀort is made to align their
terminal goals.

We've also seen that improving terminal goal alignment does improve instrumental goal
alignment. In the limit of perfect alignment between our agents' terminal goals, their
instrumental goals are perfectly aligned too.
5.1 Limitations
It's worth emphasizing that our work falls far short of a comprehensive study of instrumental
convergence. While we've arguably presented satisfying existence proofs of several
interesting phenomena, our conclusions are grounded in anecdotal examples rather than in a
systematic investigation. Even though we have reason to believe that some of the
phenomena we've observed — instrumental misalignment-by-default, in particular — are
robustly reproducible, we're still a long way from fully characterizing any of them, either
formally or empirically.
Instead, we see our research as motivating and enabling future work aimed at producing
more generalizable insights on instrumental convergence. We'd like to better understand
why and when it occurs, how strong its eﬀect is, and what approaches we might use to
mitigate it.
5.2 Suggestions for future work
We've had room here to cover in detail only a small handful of the hundreds of experiments
we actually ran. Those hundreds of experiments, in turn, were only able to probe a tiny
fraction of the vast space of possibilities in our human-AI alignment setting.
In order to accelerate this research, and improve the community's understanding of
instrumental convergence as an empirical phenomenon, we're open-sourcing the codebase
we used to run the experiments in this sequence. We hope to provide documentation that's
clear and complete enough that a curious Python developer can use it to obtain interesting
results in a few days.
A few lines of eﬀort that we think could both contribute to our understanding, and constitute
relatively low-hanging fruit, are as follows:[6]
Diﬀerent reward function distributions. The reward function distributions DHA
 we've looked at in this work have sampled agent rewards from a uniform distribution
[0, 1], iid over states. But rewards in the real world are sparser, and often follow power
law distributions instead. How does instrumental value change when we account for
this?
Phase changes at high discount rates. We've seen one example of a shift in the
behavior of an agent at a high discount rate (Agent A blocking Agent H in the corridor),
which led to a relative increase in the instrumental misalignment between our agents.
It may be worth investigating how widespread this kind of phenomenon is, and what
factors inﬂuence it.
Deeper understanding of physical interactions. We've only just scratched the
surface of agent-agent interactions, with the no-overlap rule as the simplest physical
interaction we could think of. We believe incorporating more realistic interactions into
future experiments could help improve our understanding of the kinds of alignment
dynamics that are likely to occur in the real world.
Robustness of instrumental misalignment. We think instrumental misalignment-
by-default is a fairly robust phenomenon. But we could be wrong about that, and it
would be good news if we were! We'd love to see a more methodical investigation of
instrumental misalignment, including isolating the factors that systematically mitigate
or exacerbate the eﬀect.

Finally, we hope that our work — and any future experimental results that might leverage
our open-source codebase — will serve as a source of intuitions for ideas to understand and
mitigate instrumental convergence, and also as a way to test those ideas quickly at a small
scale in a simpliﬁed setting. While existence proofs for instrumental misalignment are
interesting, it's much more interesting if we can identify contexts where this kind of
misalignment doesn't occur — since these contexts are exactly the ones that may oﬀer hints
as to the solution of the full AI alignment problem.
If you're interested in pursuing the above lines of eﬀort or any others, or you'd like to know
more about this research, please drop a comment below. You can also reach out directly to
Edouard at edouard@gladstone.ai or @harris_edouard on Twitter.
1. ^
When our two agents' utility functions are logically independent (i.e., there is no mutual
information between them) we refer to this as the independent goals regime and
say that our agents have independent terminal goals. In practice, we operationalize
this regime by deﬁning a joint reward function distribution DHA (see Section 2) on which
the sampled pairs of reward functions (RH, RA) are logically independent. In general,
rewards and utilities aren't the same thing, but in our particular set of experiments we
can treat them as identical. See footnote [1] in Part 1 for more details on this point.
2. ^
Just as in that previous case, this pattern of POWER-indiﬀerence seems to emerge
because Agent A is able to eﬃciently exploit Agent H's deterministic policy. See
footnote [10] in Part 2.
3. ^
The agents in our examples so far could still interact with each other; they just
interacted indirectly, each one changing the eﬀective "reward landscape" that the
other agent perceived. Recall that we sample each agent's reward function by drawing
a reward value from a uniform [0, 1] distribution that's iid over all the states of our
MDP. That means each agent sees a diﬀerent reward value at each state, and each
state corresponds to a diﬀerent pair of positions the two agents can take on the
gridworld. So when Agent A moves from one cell to another, Agent H suddenly sees
a completely diﬀerent set of rewards over the gridworld cells it can move to (and vice
versa).
4. ^
The maze gridworld has 31 cells. One of our agents can occupy any of those 31 cells,
and under the no-overlap rule the other agent can occupy any of the remaining 30 cells
that aren't occupied by the ﬁrst agent.
5. ^
But note that despite this, our agents are still instrumentally misaligned-by-default, in
the sense that αHA < 0 in the independent goals regime.
6. ^
A ﬁfth line of eﬀort, that we allude to in the technical Appendix to Part 2, would be to
explore the eﬀects of diﬀerent seed policies. In this sequence, we've only
considered the uniform random seed policy for Agent A. Anecdotally, in early tests we

found that the choice of seed policy did in fact aﬀect results fairly strongly, mostly in
that deterministic seed policies tend to make Agent H less robust to adversarial
optimization by Agent A than random seed policies do (data not shown). We think it
would be worthwhile to investigate the eﬀect of the seed policy systematically, since
it's a contingent choice that could have substantial downstream eﬀects.

POWERplay: An open-source toolchain to
study AI power-seeking
Crossposted from the AI Alignment Forum. May contain more technical jargon than usual.
This is a linkpost for https://github.com/gladstoneai/POWERplay
We're open-sourcing POWERplay, a research toolchain you can use to study power-seeking
behavior in reinforcement learning agents. POWERplay was developed by Gladstone AI for
internal research.
POWERplay's main use is to estimate the instrumental value that a reinforcement learning
agent can get from a state in an MDP. Its implementation is based on a deﬁnition of
instrumental value (or "POWER") ﬁrst proposed by Alex Turner et al. We've extended this
deﬁnition to cover certain tractable multi-agent RL settings, and built an implementation
behind a simple Python API.
We've used POWERplay previously to obtain some suggestive early results in single-agent
and multi-agent power-seeking. But we think there may be more low-hanging fruit to be
found in this area.
Beyond our own ideas about what to do next, we've also received some interesting
conceptual questions in connection with this work. A major reason we're open-sourcing
POWERplay is to lower the cost of converting these conceptual questions into real
experiments with concrete outcomes, that can support or falsify our intuitions about
instrumental convergence.
Ramp-up
We've designed POWERplay to make it as easy as possible for you to get started with it.
Follow the installation and quickstart instructions to get moving quickly. Use the replication
API to trivially reproduce any ﬁgure from any post in our instrumental convergence
sequence. Design single-agent and multi-agent MDPs and policies, launch experiments on
your local machine, and visualize results with clear ﬁgures and animations.

POWERplay comes with "batteries included", meaning all the code samples in the
documentation should just work out-of-the-box if it's been installed successfully. It also
comes with pre-run examples of experimental results, so you can understand what "normal"
output is supposed to look like. While this does make the repo weigh in at about 500 MB, it's
worth the beneﬁts of letting you immediately start playing around with visualizations on
preexisting data.
If we've done our job right, a smart and curious grad student (with a bit of Python
experience) should be able to start reproducing our previous experiments within an hour,
and to have some new — and hopefully interesting! — results within a week.
We're looking forward to seeing what people do with this. If you have any questions or
comments about POWERplay, feel free to reach out to Edouard at edouard@gladstone.ai.
Clone POWERplay on GitHub.

