
Gears of Aging
1. Wrinkles
2. Homeostasis and "Root Causes" in Aging
3. The Lens, Progerias and Polycausality
4. Adaptive Immune System Aging
5. Highlights of Comparative and Evolutionary Aging
6. Core Pathways of Aging

Wrinkles
Why does our skin form wrinkles as we age?
This post will outline the answer in a few steps:
Under what conditions do materials form wrinkles, in general?
How does the general theory of wrinkles apply to aging human skin?
What underlying factors drive the physiological changes which result in wrinkles?
In the process, we'll draw on sources from three diﬀerent ﬁelds: mechanical engineering,
animation, and physiology.
Why do Materials Wrinkle?
Imagine we have a material with two layers:
A thin, stiﬀ top layer
A thick, elastic bottom layer
We squeeze this material from the sides, so the whole thing compresses.
The two layers want to do diﬀerent things under compression:
The thin top layer maintains its length but wants to minimize bending, so it wants to
bow outward and form an arc
The elastic bottom layer wants to minimize vertical displacement, so it wants to just
compress horizontally without any vertical change at all.
Because the two layers are attached, these two objectives trade oﬀ, and the end result is
waves - aka wrinkles. Longer waves allow the top layer to bend less, so a stiﬀer top layer
yields longer waves. Shorter waves allow the bottom layer to expand/compress less
vertically, so a stiﬀer bottom layer yields shorter waves. The "objectives" can be quantiﬁed
via the energy associated with bending the top layer or displacing the bottom layer, leading
to quantitative predictions of the wavelength - see this great review paper for the math.
Engineers do this with a thin metal coating on soft plastic. The two are bound together at
high temperature, and then the whole system compresses as it cools. The end result is cool
wrinkle patterns:

Other interesting applications include predicting mountain spacing (with crust and mantle as
the two layers) and surface texture of dried fruit - see the review paper for more info and
cool pictures.
The same thing happens in skin.
Skin Layers
For our purposes, skin has three main layers:
The epidermis is a thin, relatively stiﬀ top layer
The SENEB (subepidermal non-echogenic band, also sometimes called subepidermal
low-echogenic band, SLEB) is a mysterious age-related layer, mostly absent in youth
and growing with age, between the epidermis and dermis - more on this later
The dermis is the thick base layer, containing all the support structure - blood vessels,
connective tissue, etc
Both the SENEB and the dermis are relatively thick, elastic layers, while the epidermis is thin
and stiﬀ. So, based on the model from the previous section, we'd expect this system to form
wrinkles.
But wait, if our skin has a thin stiﬀ top layer and thick elastic bottom layer even in youth,
then why do wrinkles only form when we get old?
Turns out, young people have wrinkles too. In youth, the wrinkles have short wavelength - we
have lots of tiny wrinkles, so they're not very visible. As we age, our wrinkle-wavelength
grows, so we have fewer, larger wrinkles - which are more visible. The real question is not
"why do wrinkles form as we age?" but rather "why does the wavelength of wrinkles grow as
we age?".

Based on the simple two-layer model, we'd expect that either the epidermis becomes more
stiﬀ with age, or the lower layers become less stiﬀ.
This the right basic idea, but of course it's a bit more complicated in practice. These guys
use a three-layer model, cross-reference parameters from the literature with what actually
reproduces realistic age-related wrinkling (speciﬁcally for SENEB modulus), and ﬁnd realistic
age-related wrinkles with these numbers:
(arrows indicate change from young to old). Other than the SENEB elastic modulus, all of
these numbers are derived from empirically measured parameters - see the paper for
details.
Age-Related Physiological Changes
We have two main questions left:
Why do the dermis and epidermis stiﬀen with age?
What exactly is the SENEB, and why does it grow with age?
I haven't looked too much into stiﬀening of the dermis, but the obvious hypothesis is that it
stiﬀens for the same reason lots of other tissues stiﬀen with age. At some point I'll have a
post on stiﬀening of the vasculature which will talk about that in more depth, but for now I'm
going to punt.
The paper from the previous section notes that the epidermis stiﬀens mainly due to
dehydration; rehydrating the epidermis reverses the stiﬀening (this is the basis of many
cosmetics). A dehydrated epidermis makes sense, since both the SENEB and age-related
problems in the vasculature will isolate the epidermis more from the bloodstream (although I
haven't seen direct experimental evidence of that causal link).
That leaves the mysterious SENEB. What is it, and why does it grow with age?
The name "subepidermal non-echogenic band" is a fancy way of saying that there's a layer
under the epidermis which is transparent to ultrasound imaging. That's the main way the
SENEB is detected: it shows up as a space between the epidermis and dermis on ultrasound
images of the skin.
As far as I can tell, little is known about the SENEB. The main things we do know:
SENEB grows with age; see numbers above
SENEB is found in aged skin typically exposed to sunlight ("photoaged", e.g. hands and
face) but not in hidden skin (e.g. butt).
Most authors claim that the SENEB consists of elastin deposits. That matches what we know
of solar elastosis, the build-up of elastin deposits in photoaged skin. But I haven't seen
anyone systemically line up the ultrasonic and histologic images and chemically analyze the

SENEB layer to check that it really is made of elastin. (This may just be a case of diﬀerent
researchers with diﬀerent tools using diﬀerent names for things which are the same.)
Assuming that the SENEB does consist of accumulated elastin, why is elastin accumulating?
Well, it turns out that elastin is never broken down in humans. It does not turn over. On the
other hand, the skin presumably needs to produce new elastin sometimes to heal wounds.
Indeed, many authors note that the skin's response to UV exposure is basically a wound-
healing response. Again, I haven't seen really convincing data, but I haven't dug too
thoroughly. It's certainly plausible that elastin is produced in response to UV as part of a
wound-healing response, and then accumulates with age. That would explain why the SENEB
grows in photoaged skin, but not in hidden skin.

Homeostasis and "Root Causes" in
Aging
Let's start with a stylized fact: almost every cell type in the human body is removed
and replaced on a regular basis. The frequency of this turnover ranges from a few
days (for many immune cells and cells in the gastrointestinal lining) to ten years (for
fat, heart, and skeleton cells). Only a handful of tissues are believed to be non-
renewing in humans - e.g. eggs, neurons, and the lens of the eye (and even out of
those, neurons are debatable).
This means that the number of cells of any given type is determined by "homeostatic
equilibrium" - the balance of cell removal and replacement. If an ulcer destroys a
bunch of cells in your stomach lining, they'll be replaced over a few days, and the
number of stomach cells will return to roughly the same equilibrium level as before. If
a healthy person receives a bunch of extra red blood cells in a transfusion, they'll be
broken down over a few months, and the number of blood cells will return to roughly
the same equilibrium level as before.
As organisms age, we see a change in the homeostatic equilibrium level of many
diﬀerent cell types (and other parameters, like hormone and cytokine levels). In
particular, a wide variety of symptoms of aging involve "depletion" (i.e. lower
observed counts) of various cell types.
However, human aging happens on a very slow timescale, i.e. decades. Most cell
counts equilibrate much faster - for instance, immune cell counts equilibrate on a
scale of days to weeks. So, suppose we see a decrease in the count of certain immune
cells with age - e.g. naive T cells. Could it be that naive T cells just wear out and die
oﬀ with age? No - T cells are replaced every few weeks, so a change on a timescale of
decades cannot be due to the cells themselves dying oﬀ. If the count of naive T cells
falls on a timescale of decades, then either (a) the rate of new cell creation has
decreased, or (b) the rate of old cell removal has increased (or both). Either of those
would require some "upstream" change to cause the rate change.
More generally: in order for cell counts, or chemical concentrations, or any other
physiological parameter to decrease/increase with age, at least one of the following
must be true:
the timescale of turnover is on the order of decades (or longer)
rate of removal increases/decreases
rate of creation decreases/increases
If none of these is true, then any change is temporary - the cell
count/concentration/whatever will return to the same level as before, determined by
the removal and creation rates.
Of those three possibilities, notice that the second two - increase/decrease in
production/removal rate - both imply some other upstream cause. Something else
must have caused the rate change. Sooner or later, that chain of cause-and-eﬀect
needs to bottom out, and it can only bottom out in something which equilibrates on a
timescale of decades or longer. (Feedback loops are possible, but if all the
components equilibrate on a fast timescale then so will the loop.) Something
somewhere in the system is out-of-equilibrium on a timescale of decades. We'll call

that thing (or things) a "root cause" of aging. It's something which is not replaced on a
timescale faster than decades, and it either accumulates or decumulates with age.
Now, the main criteria: a root cause of aging cannot be a higher or lower value
of any parameter subject to homeostasis on a faster timescale than aging
itself. Examples:
Most cell types turn over on timescales of days to months. "Depletion" of any of
these cell types cannot be a root cause of aging; either their production rate has
decreased or their removal rate has increased.
DNA damage (as opposed to mutation) is normally repaired on a timescale of
hours - sometimes much faster, depending on type. "Accumulation" of DNA
damage cannot be a root cause of aging; either the rate of new damage has
increased or the repair rate has decreased.
DNA mutations cannot be repaired; from a cell's perspective, the original
information is lost. So mutations can accumulate in a non-equilibrium fashion,
and are a plausible root cause under the homeostasis argument.
Note that the homeostasis argument does not mean the factors ruled out above are
not links in the causal chain. For instance, there's quite a bit of evidence that DNA
damage does increase with age, and that this has important physiological eﬀects.
However, there must be changes further up the causal chain - some other long-term
change in the organism's state leads to faster production or slower repair of DNA
damage. Conversely, the homeostasis argument does not imply that "plausible root
causes" are the true root causes - for instance, although DNA mutations could
accumulate in principle, cells with certain problematic mutations are believed to be
cleared out by the immune system - so the number of cells with these mutations is in
equilibrium on a fast timescale, and cannot be a root cause of aging.
For any particular factor which changes with age, key questions are:
1. Is it subject to homeostasis?
2. If so, on what timescale does it turn over?
3. If it is subject to homeostasis on a timescale faster than aging, then what are
the production and removal mechanisms, and what changes the production and
removal rates with age?
These determine the applicability of the homeostasis argument. Typically, anything
which can normally be ﬁxed/replaced/undone by the body will be ruled out as a root
cause of aging - the timescale of aging is very long compared to practically all other
physiological processes. We then follow the causal chain upstream, in search of
plausible root cause.

The Lens, Progerias and Polycausality
Fun fact: the lens of a human eye consists mostly of ﬁber deposits which are never
broken down - they do not turn over. Furthermore, new ﬁber layers are constantly
added throughout life, so the lens thickens linearly by about 25 microns per year.
Starting at around 3.5mm in infancy, it reaches 5.5mm in old age.
The main clinical result of this is the practically-universal need for glasses for close-up
vision in people over 55 years old.
(Source: Physiological Basis of Aging and Geriatrics; the section on the eye is one of
the most detailed in the book.)
Besides being a simple, self-contained gear in its own right, the growth of the lens is a
clear, knock-down example of an independent root cause of one symptom of aging.
We know exactly what's accumulating in a nonequilibrium fashion: the ﬁbers of the
lens. It's wildly unlikely that the growth of the lens is a root cause for other symptoms
of aging - like wrinkles, atherosclerosis, Alzheimer's, cancer, muscle degeneration,
etc. So, we have a clear case for polycausality - at least for one symptom of aging.
That said, there's a fair bit of evidence that most symptoms of aging share a common
root cause, or at least a common intermediate. Qualitatively, many/most symptoms of
aging in a wide variety of tissues:
Look similar at the cellular level - there's a loss of homeostasis, with cells dying
oﬀ faster than they're replaced, high levels of misfolded protein aggregates
(a.k.a. junk), and markers of chronic inﬂammation
Follow a similar population-level onset/progression timetable: no noticeable
problems from youth through mid-twenties, gradual onset/progression
throughout middle age, then rapidly accelerating breakdown around 50-60 years
of age and older. Some examples: cancer incidence, muscle loss,
atherosclerosis. Google a performance metric which declines with age, and you'll
probably see the pattern.
Are correlated - someone who has one problem early is likely to have others
early, and vice versa. See the literature on physiological/biological aging clocks
for details.
The growth of the lens does not follow this pattern - it's just a straight-line linear
growth starting from childhood, without any unusual role of chronic inﬂammation or
misfolded proteins or other typical aging-associated characteristics. On the other
hand, there are other contributing factors to old-age vision problems which do follow
the usual pattern - for instance, the loss of pupil muscle mass.
Besides the growth of the lens, there are a handful of other possible root/intermediate
causes of aging symptoms which don't follow the usual pattern. None of them are as
conclusive an example as the lens, but they may be involved in nastier diseases. In
particular: the thymus is an organ which trains adaptive immune cells to distinguish
pathogens from healthy host cells. That organ begins to shrink (called "thymic
involution") even in the ﬁrst year of life, and steadily loses most of its mass by old
age. I'll likely have a full post on that later.
Progerias

One interesting source of evidence about common root causes of aging symptoms is
accelerated aging diseases, a.k.a. progerias. I'll talk about two: Werner Syndrome
(WS) and Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS).
Werner syndrome is the progeria which most closely resembles true aging. People
with WS develop normally through puberty, but then develop a laundry list of aging
symptoms early:
Gray hair
Hair loss
Wrinkles
Skin hardening/tightening
Loss of fat tissue
Atrophy of gonads
Cataracts
Atherosclerosis
Type 2 diabetes
Muscle degeneration
Bone loss
Cancer
(you can ﬁnd all this on the wikipedia page). Perhaps even more notable: changes in
gene transcription associated with WS closely resemble the transcription changes
associated with aging.
What causes this remarkably aging-like disease? Mutation of a gene called WRN (short
for Werner), which is involved in repair of several types of DNA damage. The damage
does still get repaired (otherwise people with WS wouldn't be alive at all), but it's
slower, so presumably there's a higher steady-state level of DNA damage. This is
consistent with other lines of evidence which I may talk about in future posts: high
levels of DNA damage are associated with aging.
The other type of progeria we'll discuss is HGPS. HGPS also shows many aging-like
symptoms:
Hair loss
Wrinkles
Skin hardening/tightening
Atherosclerosis
Muscle degeneration
Bone loss
But even more notable is the symptoms of aging which are not associated with HGPS,
speciﬁcally:
Cancer
Arthritis
(Note: I didn't comprehensively check every symptom of WS against HGPS, so don't
read too much into the diﬀerences between the two lists above.)
What would cause so many aging-like symptoms, but not cancer? HGPS is caused by
mutation of a nuclear envelope protein; without it, the cell nucleus has a weird shape
(striking picture here). The main result is that cells have trouble dividing - the folded-
up nuclear envelope gets in the way of chromosome arrangement when the nucleus is

supposed to divide. The mutation limits cell division, which we'd expect to lower
homeostatic counts of a broad variety of cell types.
Assuming that's the main mechanism, we'd expect HGPS to show the symptoms of
aging associated with cell loss - e.g. hair loss, muscle degeneration - but not the
symptoms associated with biological stressors like DNA damage - e.g. cancer and
inﬂammatory diseases like arthritis. For some symptoms which aren't yet fully
understood - e.g. wrinkles or atherosclerosis - HGPS is a hint that cell loss is probably
a key mediating factor.

Adaptive Immune System Aging
The human adaptive immune system is the "smart" part of the human immune system, the
part which learns to recognize speciﬁc pathogens, allowing for immunity to e.g. chicken pox.
For our current purposes, the key players are T-cells. T-cells start out "naive" and eventually
learn to recognize speciﬁc antigens, becoming "memory" T-cells. The aged immune system
is characterized by a larger fraction of memory relative to naive T-cells (without dramatic
change in overall counts). This makes the elderly immune system slower to adapt to new
pathogens.
This post is mainly about why the naive:memory T-cell ratio shifts with age, how to undo that
shift, and some speculation about implications and applications.
A natural hypothesis (frequently asserted in the literature): the shift toward memory T-cells is
driven by slower production of new (naive) T-cells. The T-cells themselves maintain overall
cell count by living longer, resulting in a larger proportion of older (memory) cells.
The interesting part: why would the production of new T-cells fall with age?
Turns out there's an obvious culprit: the thymus. The thymus is the last stop in the
production line for new T-cells. It provides a sort of boot camp, training the T-cells to
distinguish "self" (your own cells) from "other" (pathogens) using a whole battery of tricks. T-
cells which make it through become full-time members of the naive T-cell reserve, and go on
to police the body.
With age, the thymus does this:
(source: PhysAging). This is called "involution" of the thymus.
Many organs shrink with age, but the thymus is among the most dramatic. Unlike most age-
related loss, it starts even before development is complete - the thymus shrinks measurably
between day zero and a child's ﬁrst birthday. And it keeps on shrinking, at a steady rate,
throughout childhood and adult life. The extremely early start of thymic involution suggests
it's more a developmental phenomenon than an age-related phenomenon - perhaps an
appropriate hormonal mix could undo thymic involution?
Turns out, castration of aged mice (18-24 mo) leads to complete restoration of the thymus in
about 2 weeks. The entire organ completely regrows, and the balance of naive to memory T-
cells returns to the level seen in young mice. (Replicated here.) This is pretty dramatic
evidence that:
The thymus only generates/regenerates in the absence of sex hormones
The age-related shift in naive:memory T-cell ratio is driven primarily by thymic
involution
Particularly intriguing: we already have chemical castration methods, which are generally
considered reversible. And it only took two weeks for the mice to regrow the whole thymus.
At this point we're speculating, but assuming chemical castration also works and it translates

to humans and the thymus doesn't rapidly re-involute after ceasing the chemical
castration... that sounds pretty promising as an avenue to ﬁxing age-related adaptive
immune system decline in humans.
As long as we're speculating, let's speculate hard. Immunotherapy is the hot new thing in
cancer these days - apparently T-cells in young people remove precancerous cells and attack
tumors, but in old people that doesn't happen as reliably. So... have there been any studies
on how castration eﬀects cancer? For starters, chemical castration is already a widely-used
treatment for both prostate and breast cancer. It works. But that's prostate and breast;
they're sex organs, which we'd expect to atrophy in the absence of sex hormones. I don't
know of any studies on the eﬀects of chemical castration on other types of cancer, in
humans.
In rats, however, at least one century-old study ﬁnds that castration prevents age-related
cancer - and quite dramatically so. Castrated mice' rate of resistance to an implanted tumor
was ~50%, vs ~5% for controls. (This study ﬁnds a similar result in rabbits.) That old rat
study cites a few others with mutually-conﬂicting results, and proposes that the age of the
rats used explains it all: investigators who use young rats ﬁnd that castration has little-to-no
eﬀect on resistance to an implanted tumor. Exactly what we'd expect if it's all mediated by
thymic involution & regrowth.
There's a lot of questions here. Does chemical castration have similar eﬀects to surgical
castration on thymic regrowth in mice? Does chemical castration result in regrowth of the
thymus in humans? (Several states/countries require chemical castration as a condition of
parole for certain sex oﬀenders, and it's also used for prostate and breast cancer, so it
should be possible to ﬁnd a few old people using it and see whether their thymus has
regrown.) Does the thymus rapidly re-involute after administration of chemical castration
ceases? Does chemical castration work as a treatment for cancers besides prostate and
breast? Is the eﬀectiveness of chemical castration against cancer age-dependent? Can
temporary administration of chemical castration prevent cancer for a long period of time?
Turning away from applications and back to gears, there's also some key questions around
thymic involution itself. The individual cells of the thymus don't have unusually slow
turnover; if the thymic cell count is decreasing over time, then either the rate of production
is decreasing or the breakdown rate is increasing. There has to be some upstream cause.
Whatever that cause is, it probably isn't the same upstream cause as most age-related
problems - thymic involution doesn't follow the usual pattern of no noticeable problems
during development, slow loss of performance in middle age, then accelerating failure in old
age.
I'd be excited to see more work along these lines and/or references to relevant studies.

Highlights of Comparative and
Evolutionary Aging
Author's Note: the purpose of this sequence is gears, i.e. physiology and molecular/cellular-
level mechanisms, not evolution. This post contains only some bare-minimum background
information as context for the rest; check out Will Bradshaw's series for a short intro which
does better justice to evolutionary theories of aging in their own right.
Many species do not age: hydra, some turtles, rougheye rockﬁsh, naked mole rats, and
probably many others which we just haven't sat around and watched long enough yet. This
does not mean these organisms are immortal - in the wild, they get eaten or infected sooner
or later. But their physiology does not change with age; post-development, older organisms
look physiologically identical to younger organisms. They don't get more wrinkles, or weaker
muscles, or inﬂamed joints. In particular, non-aging species are not more likely to die soon as
they get older. We call it "negligible senescence".
Contrast to humans:

This is the Gompertz-Makeham Law of mortality: after development, humans' annual death
rate increases exponentially with age (doubling time ~8 years). For naked mole rats and
other non-aging species, this curve would be completely ﬂat after childhood. (Side note: that
bump around age 20 is the car-accident bump).
This raises an evolutionary puzzle: aging obviously entails loss of functionality and increased
death rate. Surely those things can't be beneﬁcial to organism ﬁtness. But we know it's
physiologically possible for organisms to not age, so if aging isn't evolutionarily beneﬁcial,
why do organisms ever age? Why haven't all organisms evolved negligible senescence?
Well, once an organism has reproduced, evolution doesn't really care what happens any
more. Sure, slowly breaking down over time won't be beneﬁcial, but it's not a signiﬁcant
disadvantage either, as long as the kids are grown. And in nature, the vast majority of
organisms will die to predation or disease or starvation pretty quickly anyway. So, whenever
there's an opportunity to gain some early-life advantage in exchange for aging later in life,
that's going to be an evolutionarily advantageous trade-oﬀ. This is the "antagonistic
pleiotropy" evolutionary theory of aging: most organisms age because there's little selective
pressure not to, and there are advantages to be had from trade-oﬀs in favor of early life.

This ties in to the general theory of "life history strategies": some creatures produce large
numbers of oﬀspring but don't invest much in raising the children, while others produce just
a few oﬀspring and invest heavily in them. Creatures which invest heavily in their children
will be more evolutionarily useful post-reproduction, so we should expect them to have
longer lives; creatures which don't invest much won't gain as much ﬁtness by living longer.
At the extreme, we see organisms which spend their entire metabolic resources on
reproduction, maximizing the number of young produced, and die shortly after.
There is some impressive evidence in favor of antagonistic pleiotropy in comparative (i.e.
cross-species) aging - life history strategies do turn out to correlate quite heavily with
lifespan, by multiple measures, and the measures which we'd expect to better reﬂect life
history tend to screen oﬀ those which reﬂect it less well. I'm not going to go into the details
here, but Robert Arking's "The Biology of Aging" has a decent chapter on it (chapter 4).
For humans speciﬁcally, there's some evidence that we have higher-than-usual evolutionary
pressure against aging. In particular, humans are quite long-lived for animals our size. In
general, larger animals have longer lifespans - mice live ~3 years, lions and gazelles live 10-
15 years, elephants live 50-70... yet humans outlive elephants. Our long life span is typically
attributed to very long gestational periods combined with a very high degree of parental
investment in children. In the antagonistic pleiotropy <-> life history picture, high-parental-
investment strategies are generally associated with long species life-spans, and vice-versa:
when organisms don't invest in their progeny, they are less evolutionarily useful in old age.
Since we humans invest extremely heavily in our oﬀspring, we are unusually useful in old
age, and thus have unusually long lifespans.

Core Pathways of Aging
Most overviews of aging suﬀer from multiple problems:
They dump a bunch of ﬁndings with no high-level picture.
Many of the claims they make are outdated, purely theoretical, and sometimes even
outright disproven by existing work.
They are usually written by working academics, who are shy about telling us when their
peers' work is completely wrong.
They are shy about making strong claims, since this would also implicitly mean denying
some claims of the authors' peers.
This post is a high-level brain-dump of my current best models of the core pathways of
aging, as I currently understand them. I have no particular reason to avoid calling out claims
I think are wrong/irrelevant, and I'm going to present high-level models without pages and
pages of disclaimers and discussions about results which maybe disagree with them (but are
probably just wrong/irrelevant).
Epistemic status: I would be surprised if none of it turned out to be wrong, but there are
multiple lines of evidence supporting most claims. It is not highly polished, and references
are included only when I have them readily on hand. My ideal version of this piece would
have more detailed references, more double-checking behind the claims, and more direct
presentation of the data which backs up each claim. Unfortunately, that would take enough
time and eﬀort that I'm unlikely to actually get to it soon. So... here's what I could produce in
a reasonable amount of time. Hopefully it will be wrong/unhelpful in ways orthogonal to how
most overviews are wrong/unhelpful.
Foundations
First, let's recap a couple foundational principles. I'll go through these pretty quickly; see the
linked posts for more info.
Homeostasis and "Root Causes" in Aging: the vast majority of proteins, cells, etc, in the
human body turn over on a timescale from days to months. At any given time, their level
(e.g. protein concentration, cell count, etc) is in equilibrium on the turnover timescale - i.e.
the rate of creation approximately equals the rate of removal. For any X with turnover much
faster than aging (i.e. decades), if we see the level of X increase/decrease on the timescale
of a human lifetime, then that is not due to permanent "accumulation of X" or "depletion of
X"; it is due to increase/decrease in the rate of creation/removal of X. For instance:
DNA damage is typically repaired on a timescale of hours or faster , depending on the
type. If DNA damage levels increase with age, that is due to an increase in rate of
damage or decrease in rate of repair, not permanent accumulation.
Typical senescent cells turn over on a timescale of days to weeks. If the number of
senescent cells increases with age, that is due to an increase in rate of senescent cell
production or decrease in rate of removal, not permanent accumulation.
Elastin is believed to not turn over at all in humans. So if we see elastin deposits
increasing with age (e.g. in wrinkles), then that could be permanent accumulation.
Furthermore: suppose we have a positive feedback cycle. Increasing A decreases the rate of
production of B, so B decreases. But decreasing B decreases the rate of removal of A, so A
increases. If both A and B individually turn over on a timescale of hours or faster then this
feedback loop as a whole will also typically operate on a timescale of hours or faster - i.e.
count/concentration of A will explode upward on roughly that timescale. More generally, a

feedback loop will usually operate on the timescale of its slowest component, exactly like the
rate-limiting step of a chemical reaction.
Main upshot of all this: since aging involves changes on a timescale of decades, there must
be some component which is out-of-equilibrium on a timescale of decades or longer (i.e.
does not turn over signiﬁcantly across a full human lifespan). These are the components
which we'll call "root causes". Everything else which changes with age, changes only in
response to the root causes. Reset the root causes to young-organism levels, and everything
else will equilibrate to young-organism levels in response. Furthermore, a reset of the root
causes only needs to happen once every few decades for humans - it fully resets the human
to a youthful state, so ongoing treatment is not needed on short timescales.
The Lens, Progerias and Polycausality: The lens of the human eye consists of ﬁber deposits
which do not turn over signiﬁcantly over the course of a human lifetime. New ﬁber layers are
added over time, so the lens grows from around 3.5mm in infancy to 5.5mm in old age. The
main clinical result is the near-universal need for reading glasses in old age.
This is a well-understood root cause of one symptom of old age. Furthermore, it is very likely
independent of most other age related diseases - lens thickening is unlikely to cause cancer
or heart disease, for instance. So, it's an existence proof: there is more than one root cause
of aging.
That said, there's a fair bit of evidence that most symptoms of aging - including the major
age-related diseases - share a common root cause, or at least a common core pathway.
Some kinds of evidence of this:
Most symptoms/diseases of aging are correlated - someone who has one early is likely
to have others. Conceptually, if you do a factor analysis on aging symptoms, there's
one big factor for a bunch of diseases, even after controlling for the number of years
one has lived. ("Aging clock" is a relevant piece of jargon here.)
At the cellular level, a lot of diseases of aging "look similar", and involve similar pieces.
There's a decrease in cell count, increase in damaged proteins/DNA/fats, and
inﬂammation. We see roughly this pattern in Alzheimers, atherosclerosis, muscle loss,
and many others.
Certain simple interventions reliably produce many diseases of aging - for instance,
progerias are single mutations which produce a whole "early aging" phenotype
Conversely, certain simple interventions reliably delay many diseases of aging - e.g.
calorie restricted diets.
... so these all point to shared underlying causes. This post will be about the "core pathways"
most likely involved.
Major Diseases
These subsections will talk about various speciﬁc age-related diseases, mainly highlighting
how they connect to the cellular processes we'll talk about later. Two main themes to watch:
reactive oxygen species and senescent cells.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) aka free radicals are produced in greater numbers in old age.
These are short-lived, highly reactive molecules. They react with all sorts of things,
oxidatively "damaging" whatever they hit, including proteins, fats, and DNA.
Senescent cells are cells which have partially shut down in a programmatic way, triggered by
some sort of "stress" on the cell (e.g. DNA damage, exposure to harsh chemicals or
radiation, etc). They pump out inﬂammatory signals (called the senescence-associated
secretory phenotype, or SASP). Eventually, they're removed by the immune system.

In later sections, we'll see that these two are tightly coupled. For now, we'll talk about how
they seem to underlie a variety of age-related diseases.
Atherosclerosis
If you dissect young and old mammals, one of the most obvious internal diﬀerences is in the
blood vessels:
Aortas from a 32 year old and a 24 year old on top, a 55 year old and a 65 year old on
bottom. (source)
Mammals of any age have "fatty streaks" along the walls of the vasculature, which are
exactly what they sound like. (These are the slightly lighter patches in the pictures above -
more obvious in the older aortas, but faintly visible in the young pair as well.) In older
mammals, the fatty streaks tend to be larger, until in old age they necrotize (aka die) in the
middle and turn into thick "atherosclerotic plaques" (the dark patches in the lower right
picture above). These can block blood circulation, and sometimes a chunk of the plaque can
break oﬀ and block circulation in smaller vessels; either of these can cause e.g. heart attack
or stroke. 
At any age, a lower-fat diet is associated with smaller fatty streaks and lower chance of
atherosclerosis, though the streaks universally grow with age holding diet constant.
The big breakthrough in atherosclerosis came in the 80's/90's. It was known that a certain
type of cell (called a macrophage) would hoover up fat from the bloodstream, then adhere to
the cell wall when full, forming the fatty streaks. The missing puzzle piece was that the
macrophages don't just hoover up any random fats (there's rather a lot of fat in the
bloodstream and not that many macrophages; it would be like sweeping sand oﬀ the beach).

They speciﬁcally hoover up partially oxidized fats. Steinberg has a great review of various
experiments feeding into this discovery.
The upshot: streaks and plaques grow in old age primarily because the concentration of
(partially) oxidized fats in the bloodstream increases in old age. These probably don't have a
very slow turnover time, so either the rate of (partial) oxidation of fats increases in old age,
or the rate of removal decreases. Which is it, and what causes it?
The main candidate here is ROS: increasing ROS levels in old age increase the rate of
oxidative damage to fats. (One interesting question: how does the relative increase in
oxidative damage to fats compare to DNA/proteins? Do the numbers actually line up for
these to share a source? I haven't seen a solid Fermi estimate on this, I'd be interested to
see one.)
Vascular Stiﬀening
Even aside from atherosclerosis, the walls of blood vessels change in old age. In particular
they become stiﬀer.
In normal operation, the heart pumps out blood in discrete chunks - each heartbeat pumps
out some amount of blood into the arteries. The arteries expand a bit to accumulate this
blood, much like a balloon. And, like an inﬂated balloon, the arteries are at slightly higher
pressure from this extra blood, until it's pushed out through the capillaries and the cycle
starts again with the next heartbeat. It's sort of like a capacitor: the heart sends out blood at
high pressure in sudden waves, and the arteries expand and contract to store the extra
blood and smooth out the pressure variance.
If the walls become stiﬀer, then the arteries are less able to smooth out this pressure
variance. From the heart's perspective, it's trying to pump blood into a hard container, which
works about as poorly as you'd expect; this is one of the major causes of heart failure
(alongside atherosclerosis). The vessels also become more likely to burst (i.e. aneurysm). 
What causes the loss of elasticity?
The main answer seems to be oxidative damage to proteins in the wall of the blood vessels.
The key experimental evidence backing this up is the eﬀect of aminoguanidine (AG), a
powerful scavenger of certain ROS: AG administration reverses age-related stiﬀening of the
arteries. This is only temporary - i.e. the arteries go back to their stiﬀ state shortly after AG
administration stops - so it isn't a root cause, but it is a link in the causal chain. Once again,
oxidative damage likely caused by increased ROS seems to be the key causal intermediate.
(Please don't go running out to take aminoguanidine. The side eﬀects are serious, and the
beneﬁts are short-term - you'll go right back to where you would have been as soon as you
stop taking it.)
An interesting side note: many sources claim that a shift in collagen:elastin ratio is involved
in stiﬀening of the vasculature. This seems to be based on a purely theoretical paper from
decades ago, and the actual data doesn't back it up, yet review articles and textbooks
continue to mention it. 
Alzheimer's
The ﬁrst and most important thing to know about Alzheimer's (aka dementia, aka old folks
losing their memory) is that it is not caused by accumulation of amyloid beta.
Decades ago, people noticed that if you look at the brains of old people with dementia, they
usually have lots of plaques, and these plaques are made of a particular protein fragment
called amyloid beta. Therefore clearly amyloid beta causes dementia. Pretty soon people

were using amyloid beta plaques to diagnose dementia, which made it really easy to show
that the plaques cause dementia: when the plaques are how we diagnose "dementia", then
by golly removing the plaques makes the "dementia" (as diagnosed by plaques) go away.
As far as I can tell, there has never at any point in time been compelling evidence that
amyloid beta plaques cause age-related memory problems. Conversely, I have seen at least
a few studies suggesting the plaques are not causal.
Meanwhile, according to wikipedia, 244 Alzheimer's drugs were tested in clinical trials from
2002-2012, mostly targeting the amyloid plaques. Of those, only 1 drug made it through.
Bottom line: they don't work.
So what does cause Alzheimer's? I don't know; it's not a disease I've studied in depth. I know
plenty of studies ﬁnd the usual culprits involved - inﬂammation, damaged proteins, etc.
I do know of one particularly interesting cluster of studies which found that the brain "opens
up" during sleep, increasing ﬂow of cerebral ﬂuid to clear out whatever junk accumulated
during the day - including amyloid beta. The ﬂow takes place in "paravascular" spaces, i.e.
spaces around the blood vessels, which widen during sleep. Given the age-related changes
in blood vessels (e.g. thickening & stiﬀening of walls), it would make sense for this
paravascular space to not open up as much in older people, and indeed that seems to be the
case. Whether this has anything to do with dementia, I don't know, but it is my current best
guess for the main cause of the amyloid plaques. If true, this would mean that the plaques
share their main root causes with changes in the vasculature.
Sarcopenia
Sarcopenia is age-related loss of muscle mass - i.e. old people becoming physically weak.
Overviews often say it can be (at least partially) "reversed" via exercise, which seems to be
fairly obvious bullshit aimed at making people exercise more. Bottom line: for any ﬁxed
amount of exercise, muscular strength will fall with age. (Obviously more exercise can still
increase muscle strength at any age.)
Many sources will claim that lots of research has shown sarcopenia to be caused by loss of
muscle innervation - i.e. problems with the neuromuscular junctions (NMJs). As with amyloids
and Alzheimers, as far as I can tell there was never at any point in time any compelling
evidence that NMJ changes are actually causal for muscle loss, and my current best guess is
that they are not causal. However, research on age-related changes in NMJ structure did
produce very shiny images, which I think is probably the main reason they received so much
attention in the ﬁrst place.

Neuromuscular junctions from young (2-month) and old (25-month) mice. (source)
So what does cause sarcopenia? I don't yet have a full picture here, but I can sketch out my
current best guess.
Muscle cells are not normal cells; they're mega-cells, a hundred times longer than a normal
cell, with hundreds of nuclei all within the same cell. They need so many nuclei because
molecules which would diﬀuse quickly from one end to the other of a normal cell would take
far too long to diﬀuse across a muscle cell (diﬀusion time increases faster-than-linearly with
distance); so, things need to be produced locally.
This setup also makes it diﬃcult for an entire muscle cell to turn over. Instead, the nuclei
turn over (along with all the usual protein/membrane/etc turnover mechanisms); they're
regularly replaced from "satellite cells", a type of stem cell nestled in next to the muscle
whose job is basically to crank out new nuclei from time to time.

In sarcopenia, one cross-section of the long muscle cell will fail ﬁrst - a "ragged red" section -
and then failure gradually spreads along the length. The failing section involves the usual
culprits: ROS, mitochondrial deﬁciency (related to ROS; more on that later), inﬂammation
signals, etc.
My best guess is that this is basically just how cellular senescence manifests in a muscle cell.
One particular satellite cell is "close to senescence", and produces nuclei which rapidly
"senesce". But since muscle cells are really a bunch of relatively-isolated components along
their length (due to long diﬀusion time), this only results in one section of the cell failing.
Eventually, the "senescence" spreads to adjacent sections via the usual mechanisms of
senescence-induced-senescence (more on that later). Key characteristics of "ragged red"
sections of the muscle cell - like high ROS, mitochondrial deﬁciency, or inﬂammation - are
the usual characteristics of senescent cells, and sarcopenia probably shares its root cause(s)
with cellular senescence more generally.
Other Diseases
This section brieﬂy mentions a few other age-diseases which I've read a little bit about, but
haven't studied in as much depth. I'll just give a few comments on how they tie in to the
cellular processes discussed later.
Arthritis: arthritis is basically inﬂammation in the joints. I've heard plenty of claims that it's
caused by increasing numbers of senescent cells. This would make sense; senescent cell
counts are ﬁrmly established to increase with age, and senescent cells secrete inﬂammatory
factors, so put 2 and 2 together. On the other hand, I also heard a high-proﬁle clinical trial
based on this hypothesis recently failed; I don't consider that especially strong evidence,
since that could easily be due to something speciﬁc to the trial. I don't know enough to have
a strong belief on whether senescent cells are the main factor here, but it's my most likely
current model.
Osteoporosis: calcium regulation goes completely bonkers with age. I've looked into this only
brieﬂy, and my main conclusion is that it's a confusing mess and I have no idea what's going
on. The most promising direction I've stumbled on was in a physiology class, unrelated to
aging, when the professor mentioned that osteoblasts (bone-making cells and a major
calcium regulator) are derived from immune cells and respond to inﬂammatory signals.
Given that aging in general tends to involve low-grade chronic inﬂammation (most likely due
to increasing numbers of senescent cells), "calcium regulation goes completely bonkers"
seems like the sort of thing which would result.
Cancer: the key requirement for cancer is cells with oncogenic mutations. As usual,
increasing cancer rates could be caused in two main ways: increasing production rate of
mutations, or decreasing removal rate of mutant cells. There are plausible age-related
mechanisms for both of these. On the production side, we'll later discuss how genomic
instability relates to ROS and senescence, and in particular the role of transposons. On the
removal side, the immune system weakens with age, likely for the same reasons as
everything else weakens with age. Also, in this case it's plausible that an increase in the
production rate of precancerous cells and/or senescent cells would slow the removal rate as
well, simply because the immune system has limited capacity.
Cataracts: as with hardening of the vasculature, cataracts can be reversed by
aminoguanidine, so the same considerations apply.
Core Intermediates
Now we get to the meaty part. At the microscopic level, there's a handful of pieces which
pop up again and again in age-related diseases:

Oxidative damage to DNA, proteins, fats, etc.
ROS
Senescent cells
Inﬂammation
Mitochondrial dysfunction
Some of these have obvious connections. For instance, more ROS presumably lead to more
oxidative damage to DNA/proteins/fats/etc. Some key questions here:
Where are the ROS produced? Mitochondria are the top candidate - there's a known
mechanism for ROS production by mitochondria, as well as experimental evidence that
mitochondrion-targeted antioxidants speciﬁcally reduce ROS-induced damage.
How do the ROS and/or damaged molecules move between compartments, e.g.
nucleus/cytoplasm/extracellular? I have seen very little on this, and consider it a major
blindspot. I'm not sure if it's a blindspot for the ﬁeld or if I just haven't found the right
cluster of papers.
Are the quantitative changes in DNA/protein/fat damage compatible with a single
underlying cause? Do they match plausible estimates of ROS from dysfunctional
mitochondria? Again, I haven't seen Fermi estimates here, but I'd like to.
We do have evidence (from aminoguanidine and similar drugs; good overview here for
protein damage) that ROS are causal for various types of damage.
Another connection: we've already mentioned that senescent cells release inﬂammatory
factors, the so-called "senescence-associated secretory phenotype" (SASP). The one
question here for which I haven't seen a clear answer is whether increasing numbers of
senescent cells quantitatively match age-related increases in inﬂammation. Drugs to remove
senescent cells are a hot area right now, and should provide more evidence on whether
senescent cells are causal for age-related inﬂammation.
So we have two clusters of probably-causally-connected processes. One of these involves
dysfunctional mitochondria producing excess ROS which damages DNA/proteins/fats, and the
other involves senescent cells inducing inﬂammation.
The really big discovery of the past twenty years was the connection between cellular
senescence and ROS/mitochondrial dysfunction. Turns out, ROS, DNA damage, and
mitochondrial dysfunction are all tied together in one bistable feedback loop, and cellular
senescence is basically a state-change in that feedback loop.
The DNA Damage <-> Mitochondrial ROS Feedback Loop
Underlying Senescence
The two key papers here are "Feedback between p21 and reactive oxygen production is
necessary for cell senescence" and "Mitochondrial Dysfunction Accounts for the Stochastic
Heterogeneity in Telomere-Dependent Senescence". Another group found basically the same
phenomenon, but they found some weird diﬀerences compared to normal senescence which
I think were probably artifacts of how they blocked mitochondrial function, so they're less
directly relevant to cellular senescence in the wild.
Here's how the feedback loop works:
A cell's DNA is damaged, inducing a damage response.  (p21 is the main signalling
molecule which activates the damage-response genes.)
As part of this damage response, mitochondria are shifted into a lower-eﬃciency state,
producing less energy and more ROS.
The ROS then further damage DNA.

At low levels of activation, the ROS do not produce enough DNA damage to make this loop
self-sustaining. The cell stays in a low-ROS, low-damage state - the "normal" state. But once
it passes some threshold, the positive feedback takes oﬀ, and the cell transitions into a high-
ROS, high-damage state - the "senescent" state.
Notably, after a few days, the cell changes in some other (not yet fully understood) manner,
locking in the senescent state. After this point, even if ROS are suppressed, the cell will
remain in senescence rather than switching back to the normal-cell state. Transposons are
one plausible candidate for this lock-in; more on that shortly.
The experimental evidence for this process is beautiful (I deﬁnitely recommend those
papers, especially the second). And it neatly uniﬁes all of the pieces we listed above: cellular
senescence is a positive feedback loop between ROS, damage and mitochondrial
dysfunction, and the SASP connects it all to inﬂammation.
There's still one big question: why is this positive feedback loop active more often, for more
cells, in old age? The whole feedback loop is fast, senescent cells are removed on a
timescale of days to weeks, so there must be some upstream change either increasing the
rate of triggering senescence (presumably by somehow damaging DNA, possibly via ROS, or
inducing mitochondrial dysfunction) or decreasing the rate of removal of senescent cells. In
fact, both of these do occur, although personally I think the increase in rate of triggering
senescence is much more likely to be causal.
Further Up The Causal Chain
There are lots of stories about how various plausible root causes could, perhaps, trigger the
senescence feedback loop. I think transposons are the most likely candidate, though
mitochondrial mutations are a plausible mechanism as well. We'll talk about both of those in
the next two subsections. Most other proposed root causes can, I think, be ruled out at this
point - we'll talk about some of those in the "Other Root Causes" subsection below.
Transposons
A transposon is a gene whose main function is to copy itself. The LINE-1 family of
transposons (most common active transposons in humans) consist of a protein which snips
the DNA, and another protein which reverse-transcribes the transposon's mRNA into DNA
attached to the snipped end. (I'm glossing over some details here.)
These things are extremely common in the genome - more than half of human DNA consists
of dead transposons. ("Dead" here means that the transposon mutated at some point in
evolutionary history, so it's no longer functional.) Fortunately, the number of non-dead
transposons in the human genome is much smaller  - even the highest estimates I've seen
put the number typically below 100.
We do have mechanisms to repress transposon activity, most notably epigenetic
mechanisms. Most DNA is usually tightly coiled up around little cylindrical proteins (called
histones), where it can't be easily transcribed. "Epigenetics" typically refers to modiﬁcations
of the DNA and/or histones which make the coils tighter or looser, making the DNA diﬃcult or
easy to access. Most transposons are epigenetically tagged so that they're kept tightly coiled
most of the time. Indeed, an argument could be made that this is the primary role of
epigenetics - it's certainly what most epigenetic modiﬁcations are doing most of the time,
since transposons ﬁll so much of the genome.
There's an obvious story by which transposons could be a root cause of aging. Most of the
time they're repressed, but every once in a while, one of them manages to copy itself. Once
it's copied, there's no undoing it - the transposon count will only go up over time. Eventually,
there's enough active transposons that the repression mechanisms aren't so reliable. At that

point, the transposon protein which snips the DNA will be expressed quite a bit, resulting in
lots of DNA damage - those snips are exactly the sort of damage which can trigger
senescence. (Note: it's a lot easier to snip the DNA than to reverse-transcribe, so I generally
expect there to be a lot more snips than successful transposon-copy events.)
Setting aside this root-cause story for a moment, there's also evidence that cellular
senescence causes derepression of transposons. We'll talk more about the details of that
later, but the key idea here is that there's a trade-oﬀ at the cellular level between repairing
damage and repressing the transposons. When DNA damage is high, the cell temporarily
shifts resources to repair that damage, deregulating the transposons. In senescence, the
level of DNA damage is constantly high, so transposons go wild.
Of course, transposons themselves cause DNA damage (i.e. the snips), so eventually this can
lock in senescence. That's my current best understanding of why senescence gets "locked
in" after a few days: with transposons driving the DNA damage, the cell will remain
senescent even if ROS are suppressed. It's a second senescence feedback loop, slower to
start up, but permanent - once the transposons are active enough, the cell cannot leave
senescence.
Unfortunately, this makes it diﬃcult to distinguish the chicken from the egg. We know that
senescence can cause transposon activity, but we also suspect that transposon activity
comes ﬁrst and causes senescence. We can't test that hypothesis just by looking at
transposon activity in senescent cells. In principle, we could test it by looking for an age-
related increase in transposon count in non-senescent cells, but that turns out to be actually-
pretty-diﬃcult in practice. (Modern DNA sequencing involves breaking the DNA into little
pieces, sequencing those, then computationally reconstructing which pieces overlap with
each other. That's a lot more diﬃcult when the pieces you're interested in have millions of
near-copies ﬁlling most of the genome. Also, the copy-events we're interested in will vary
from cell to cell.)
One more thing to note about this model: suppose that a stem cell has a high transposon
count, but not high enough to undergo senescence itself. That stem cell will pump out new
cells, as stem cells typically do, and those cells will themselves be close to senescence. We
should therefore see little clusters of senescent cells, each derived from one stem cell. This
is where I expect most senescent cells come from in aged tissue. The "ragged red" sections
of aging muscle cells are a good example - one satellite cell is near senescence, so it pumps
out nuclei which rapidly senesce, and the section of the muscle cell near that satellite ends
up senescing.
This picture also oﬀers an obvious story for cancer - transposons are a major driver of
mutations.
Mitochondrial Mutations
Mitochondrial mutations are the center of the "mitochondrial free radical theory of aging"
(MIFRA); Aubrey de Gray's MIFRA book provides an excellent (though out-of-date) summary
of the model. Some parts of the model have been pretty well nailed down by evidence at this
point - e.g. the idea that most core diseases of aging are mainly driven by ROS, which in turn
are produced by mitochondria. The positive feedback loop underlying senescence even
further connects symptoms of aging to mitochondrial ROS.
The main piece of the MIFRA model which still seems up-in-the-air is the idea that the root
cause is mitochondrial mutations.
Background: mitochondria have their own separate DNA. There's only a handful of genes on
it; most necessary mRNA/protein sequence is supplied by the nuclear DNA. But the
mitochondria's little DNA is particularly prone to mutation - it doesn't have the nucleus
keeping it safely separated from the highly-energetic processes of the rest of the cell. The

ﬂip side is that mitochondria turn over frequently, separate from turnover of the cell itself,
and they have quality-control mechanisms - e.g. if a mitochondrion isn't producing energy
(as indicated by low transmembrane potential) then it's broken down.
A key idea hypothesis for the mitochondrial mutation model is that mutant mitochondria
which are only partially defective aren't broken down. In fact, under this hypothesis, such
mitochondria have a replicative advantage, and can expand to take over the whole cell. This
cell then becomes a "hotspot", pumping out lots of ROS.
Today, we would expect that such hotspots are senescent cells - this degree of mitochondrial
dysfunction should certainly be enough to induce senescence.
There is some evidence for this - for instance, mitochondrial mutants tend to take over whole
cells, rather than being spread evenly across cells. However, there just aren't very many of
them - senescent cells outnumber mutant-mitochondria-dominant cells by a wide margin in
old age (order of magnitude: think 10% vs 1%). Also, as we mentioned earlier, senescent
cells don't reproduce and do turn over, so even if mutant mitochondria took over one cell,
they'd need to somehow expand to others.
This still doesn't rule out the model entirely. Some possibilities:
Maybe a small fraction of senescent cells are long-lived, and these produce enough
ROS to induce senescence in a much larger population of cells.
Maybe mutant mitochondria spread before the cell is cleared (there is evidence for
exchange of mitochondria between neighboring cells).
Maybe stem cells with some mutant mitochondria produce new cells which go on to
rapidly senesce, much like we hypothesized for transposons.
On the other hand, it's also plausible (I think more plausible) that defective mitochondria are
negatively selected in healthy cells, and they only expand to take over in already-senescent
cells, where all the mitochondria are already pumping out less energy and more ROS anyway.
Other Root Causes?
Telomeres
DNA has repetitive regions called telomeres at the ends . Each time a cell divides, the
copying starts a little ways in from the end, so the telomeres get a bit shorter. Eventually,
the telomere runs out, and the bare DNA end is interpreted as damage, inducing
senescence. This has long been known to cause cellular senescence in vitro, and was
hypothesized as a root cause of aging.
Indeed, telomeres are known to shorten with age. On the other hand, upregulating
telomerase seems to do approximately nothing to prevent cellular senescence or aging more
generally. What's going on here?
Stem cells produce a protein (telomerase) which extends their telomeres. Since most cells
are replaced regularly by stem cells, that should be enough to prevent telomere-induced
senescence. But then why do we observe shorter telomeres in old age? The key result here is
that DNA damage, and ROS in particular, shorten telomeres. In vivo, telomere length is
mainly a measure of ROS damage, not a measure of age directly. So, while telomere loss can
cause senescence, the main thing which causes telomere loss is not gradual shortening as
cells divide, but rather ROS-induced damage.
So, telomere loss is likely involved as an intermediate cause (as a type of DNA damage
induced by ROS), but not a root cause.
AGEs

Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) are proteins which have somewhat-randomly
reacted with a sugar in a Maillard reaction - the same type of reaction which browns foods
and gives them ﬂavor when cooking. These products are hypothesized to accumulate long-
term in the body, since they can't be broken down.
I don't know whether there's any evidence that these molecules actually accumulate long-
term. (Just because they're not broken down doesn't mean they're not simply excreted.) I
haven't seen direct evidence, but I haven't searched very carefully either, and I haven't seen
direct evidence against.
The main argument I've seen in favor of AGEs as a root cause of (some) diseases of aging
was from aminoguanidine. It seems like people thought it prevented AGE formation before
they realized that it interrupted oxidative damage more broadly, and thus interpreted results
from aminoguanidine as indicative of a causal role for AGEs. In hindsight, even if this had
shown a causal role for AGEs, it would have ruled them out as a root cause: the eﬀects of AG
rapidly wear oﬀ once administration of the drug ceases, so it's deﬁnitely not blocking any
root cause.
Senescent Cells as Root Cause
For a while, people hypothesized that senescent cells accumulate with age without turning
over, acting as a root cause. As mentioned earlier, the actual evidence suggests that
senescent cells turn over on a timescale of days to weeks, which would mean this theory is
wrong - senescent cell accumulation is not a root cause.
However, there is a saving throw: maybe a small subset of senescent cells are longer-lived,
and the experiments measuring senescent cell turnover time just weren't capturing the long-
lived subset in particular. Results from senolytics (drugs which kill senescent cells) suggest
this is also wrong: the eﬀects of senolytics rapidly wear oﬀ once the drug stops being
administered, whereas reversing a root cause should set an organism back to a youthful
state longer-term.
Protein Damage, DNA Damage, Etc as Root Cause
Sometimes people suggest protein damage, DNA damage, etc, as root causes. These
generally turn over on fast timescales, so... no. I expect that most of these people do not
have any thought-out notion of what "root" means in "root cause", and are just using it as a
synonym for "really important".
Other Pieces of The Pathway
This last section will brieﬂy dive into a couple other aspects of the core pathways of aging
which I expect people might be interested in, and talk about how they ﬁt into the picture.
Sirtuins and NAD
David Sinclair published a popular book on aging a couple years ago, mainly talking about
his own research areas. The sirtuins are one of the main key pieces of that research.
We mentioned earlier that, when damage is detected, the cell redirects resources from
repressing transposons to repairing damage. Sirtuins are one such resource. They directly
trade oﬀ genomic stability (including transposon repression) for repair capacity.
Notably, sirtuins consume the energy carrier NAD as part of their repair role. Lots of things
use NAD as an energy carrier, switching it between a high-energy and low-energy state, but
sirtuins actually consume it - the whole molecule is incorporated into a new structure.
Usually the cell has rather a lot of NAD, but if the damage load is high and the sirtuins are

doing lots of repairs, then it can be depleted. That leaves less of it for various cellular
processes which use NAD as an energy carrier - including mitochondrial energy production.
This all ﬁts neatly into our main model: high ROS-induced damage draws sirtuins away from
transposon repression, so they become active. Meanwhile, the sirtuins' consumption of NAD
can interfere with mitochondrial function, resulting in more ROS production.
This also adds in one more piece: at younger ages, certain kinds of cellular stress (like
radiation exposure or chemical damage from an inﬂammatory response to an infection) can
also damage DNA, temporarily reducing repression of transposons. This probably won't result
in immediate senescence in most cells, but a few transposons may copy before everything
goes back to normal. The aging clock ticks forward a little faster than usual, due to these
events.
Damaged Proteins Connect To Everything
We've mentioned oxidatively damaged proteins many times now. What we didn't mention
was the numbers: in young organisms, perhaps 10% of protein is damaged. In old organisms,
it's more like 20-30%.
That is a percentage of all proteins. And almost everything our cells do is done by proteins.
Natural conclusion: eﬃciency of a very wide variety of processes will be thrown oﬀ in aging.
In most cases, this shouldn't be too noticeable - we're only talking about a 10-20% change,
and random noise does that for most protein species anyway. And the body has lots of
feedback loops in place to handle exactly this sort of thing. By and large, biological networks
evolve to be robust to 10-20% changes in protein concentrations. But, it does make things
diﬃcult for science: if there's a 10-20% change in everything, then there are always going to
be statistically signiﬁcant age-related changes in everything, even though most of them
aren't actually all that relevant.
So, be warned: there's lots of 10-20% age-related changes all over the place which mostly
aren't that relevant.
Recap
Here's the core positive feedback loop again:
A cell's DNA is damaged, inducing a damage response.
As part of this damage response, mitochondria are shifted into a lower-eﬃciency state,
producing less energy and more ROS.
The ROS then further damage DNA.
Since this is a positive feedback loop, it has two stable states: one state with low damage
and ROS (the "normal" cell state), and one with high damage and ROS (the "senescent" cell
state).
A few days after senescence is triggered, the cell's transposons become active, copying
themselves and further damaging the DNA. At this point, the transposon activity alone is
enough to maintain the senescent state, and senescence is locked in. The cell will remain
senescent until it's cleared out by the immune system, a few days to weeks later.
What causes more senescent cells as we age? The transposon model says that transposon
count increases with age - they are the root cause which permanently accumulates over
time. Once the transposon count in a cell is high enough, it produces enough damage to
trigger the senescence feedback loop. More speciﬁcally, we end up with stem cells with

enough transposons to be just below the senescence trigger, and these stem cells produce
new cells which rapidly senesce.
Senescent cells release inﬂammatory factors (the SASP) as well as ROS. These cause the
bulk of age-related diseases. ROS damage to fats causes buildup of fatty streaks and
eventually plaques in the arteries - i.e. atherosclerosis - eventually leading to blockage and
strokes. Damage to proteins hardens the blood vessels, leading to heart failure and
aneurysm. Chronic inﬂammation underlies arthritis and possibly osteoporosis. Senescence
itself also leads to loss of cells, including muscle loss.
Finally, in very old age, the whole process can accelerate: ROS produced by senescent cells
can cause damage in adjacent cells, inching them closer to senescence as well. The more
cells senesce, the more damage they deal to healthy cells. Eventually the whole thing goes
supercritical (though on a slow timescale), leading to an exponential acceleration of disease
progression in old age.

