
Instrumental Rationality
1. Instrumental Rationality 1: Starting Advice
2. Instrumental Rationality 2: Planning 101
3. Instrumental Rationality 3: Interlude I
4. Instrumental Rationality 4.1: Modeling Habits
5. Instrumental Rationality 4.2: Creating Habits
6. Instrumental Rationality 4.3: Breaking Habits and Conclusion
7. Instrumental Rationality 5: Interlude II
8. Instrumental Rationality 6: Attractor Theory
9. Instrumental Rationality 7: Closing Disclaimer
10. Instrumental Rationality: Postmortem

Instrumental Rationality 1: Starting
Advice
[Instrumental Rationality Sequence 1/7. Repost from LW]
[This section goes over 4 concepts that I think are important to keep in mind before
we start the other stuﬀ. We go over caring about the obvious, looking for ways to
apply advice in the real world, practicing well, and holding realistic expectations.]
In Defense of the Obvious:
[As advertised.]
A lot of the things I'm going to go over in this sequence are sometimes going to sound
obvious, boring, redundant, or downright tautological. I'm here to convince you that
you should try to listen to such advice anyway, even if it sounds stupidly obvious.
First oﬀ, our brains don't always see all the connections at once. Thus, even if some
given advice is apparently obvious, you still might be learning new things.
For example, say I told you, "If you want to exercise more, then you should probably
exercise more. Once you do that, you'll become the type of person who exercises
more, and then you'll likely exercise more."
The above advice might sound pretty silly, but keep in mind that our mental
categories for "exercise" and "personal identity" might be in diﬀerent places. Sure, it's
tautologically true that someone who exercises becomes a person who exercises
more. But if you're not explicitly thinking in terms of how your actions change who you
are, which is what the tautology is pointing at, then you've still learned something
new.
Humans are often weirdly inconsistent with our mental buckets—things that logically
seem like they "should" be lumped together by logical implication often aren't.
By paying attention to even tautological advice like this, you're able to form new
connections in your brain and link new mental categories together, perhaps
discovering new insights that you "already knew".
Secondly, obvious advice is often used as a label for what everyone know works. If
your brain is pattern-matching something as "boring advice" or "obvious", you've
likely heard it before many times before.
For example, you can probably guess the top 5 things on any "How to be Productive"
list—make a schedule, remove distractions, take breaks, etc. etc. You can almost feel
your brain roll its metaphorical eyes at such dreary, well-worn advice.
But if you've heard these things repeated many times before, this is also good reason
to suspect that, at least for a lot of people, it actually works. Meaning that if you aren't
taking such advice already, you can probably get a boost by doing so.

If you just did those top 5 things, you'd probably already be quite the productive
person.
The trick, then, is actually doing them.
Lastly, it can be easy to discount obvious advice when you've seen too much of it.
When you're bombarded with boring-seeming advice from all angles, it's easy to
become desensitized.
What I mean is that it's possible to dismiss obvious advice outright because it sounds
way too simple. "This can't possibly work," your brain might say, "the secret to
getting things done must be more complex than that!"
In philosophy, there's this idea of a "hedonic treadmill", an idea based oﬀ our human
inclination to compare experiences relatively. For example, if you have something
tasty, like a chocolate bar, then you'll need something even tastier the next time, like
a tiramisu cake. A more stereotypical example might be a drug user seeking out an
even stronger high for their second experience.
The point is that, as you are exposed to more and more pleasures, you ﬁnd yourself
on a treadmill climb to seek out ever more delicious experiences (because, by
comparison, everything else will seem dull).
There's something akin to the hedonic treadmill happening here where, after having
been exposed to all the "normal" advice, you start to seek out deeper and deeper
ideas in search of some sort of mental high. What happens is that you become a kind
of self-help junkie.
As a self-help junkie, you end up adopting quite the contrarian stance—you reject the
typical idea of advice on grounds of its obviousness alone. There's a certain aesthetic
to being the cool kid who knows that simple advice isn't enough to solve their
complex, multi-faceted problems.
You can end up craving the bleeding edge of crazy ideas because literally nothing else
seems worthwhile. You might end up dismissing obvious helpful ideas simply because
they're not paradigm-crushing, mind-blowing, or mentally stimulating enough.
If this describes, might I tempt you with the meta-contrarian point of view?
Here's this for a crazy idea: One of the secrets to winning at life is looking at obvious
advice, acknowledging that it's obvious, and then doing it anyway.
(That's right, you can join the even cooler group of kids who scoﬀ at those who scoﬀ
at the obvious!)
You can both say, "Hey, this is pretty simple stuﬀ I've heard a thousand times before,"
as well as say, "Hey, this is pretty useful stuﬀ I should shut up and do anyway even if
it sounds simple because I'm smart and I recognize the value here."
At some point, being more sophisticated than the sophisticates means being able the
grasp the idea that not all things have to be hyper complex. Oftentimes, the trick to
getting something done is simply to get started.
Because some things in life really are obvious.

++++
Hunting for Practicality:
[This is about looking for ways to have any advice you read be actually useful, by
having it apply to the real world. ]
Imagine someone trying to explain exactly what the mitochondria does in the cell, and
contrast that to someone trying to score points in a game of basketball.
Someone could take classes to learn how to get better at each of those two things.
Yet, there's something clearly diﬀerent about what each person is trying to do, even if
we lumped both under the label of "learning".
It turns out there are roughly two types of knowledge you can learn: declarative and
procedural knowledge.
Declarative knowledge is like the student trying to puzzle out the mitochondria
question; it's about what you know. It's about how your concepts link to one another,
like how you can know that Paris is the capital city of France, or that it takes about 20
minutes to walk a mile.
In contrast, procedural knowledge, like the ﬂedgling basketball player, is about
what you do. It's about how you actually carry out certain actions, like how you learn
to throw a frisbee well, or how to ride a bike.
I bring up this divide because many of the techniques in instrumental rationality will
feel like declarative knowledge, but they'll actually be much more procedural in
nature.
For example, say you're reading an essay on motivation, and you read about how
"Motivation = Energy to do the thing + a Reminder to do the thing + Time to do the
thing = E+R+T".
What'll likely happen is that your brain will form a new set of mental nodes that
connects "motivation" to "E+R+T". This would be great if I ended up quizzing you
"What does motivation equal?" whereupon you'd correctly answer "E+R+T".
But that's not the point here!
The point is to have the equation actually cash out into the real world and positively
aﬀect your actions. If information isn't changing you view or act, then you're probably
not extracting all the value you can.
What that often means is ﬁguring out the answer to this question:
"How do I see myself taking diﬀerent actions as a result of having learned
this information?"
With that in mind, maybe you generate some examples and make a list in response to
the question.
Your list of real-world actions might end up looking like:

1. Remembering to stay hydrated more often (Energy)
2. Using more Post-It notes as memos (Reminder)
3. Start using Google Calendar to block out chunks of time (Time).
The point is to be always on the lookout for ways to see how you can use what you're
learning to inform your actions. Learning about all these things is only useful if you
can ﬁnd ways to apply them.
As we go forward, I'll try to give concrete and useful examples for all the ideas we go
over, but you want to ﬁnd ways to move past the simple pattern-matching. You want
to do more than have empty boxes that link concepts together. It's important to have
those boxes linked up to ways you can do better in the real world.
You want to actually put in some eﬀort trying to answer question of practicality.
Knowledge might be power, but you also often need to act on it.
++++
Actually Practicing:
[This is about knowing the nuances of little steps behind any sort of self-improvement
skill you learn, and how those little steps are important when learning the whole.]
So on one level, using knowledge from instrumental rationality is about how you take
declarative-seeming information and ﬁnd ways to utilize it in real world actions.
That's deﬁnitely important.
Another thing, though, is to note that the very skill of "Generating Examples"—the
thing you did in the above essay to even ﬁgure out which actions can ﬁt in the above
equation to ﬁll in the blanks of E, R, and T—is itself a mental habit that requires
procedural knowledge.
What I mean is that there's a subtler thing that's happening inside your head when
you try to come up with examples—your brain is doing something—and this
"something" is important.
It's important, I claim, because if we peer a little more deeply at what it means for
your brain to generate examples, we'll come away with a list of steps that will feel a
lot like something a brain can do, a prime example of procedural knowledge.
For example, we can imagine a magician trying to learn a card trick. They go through
the steps. First they need to spread the cards. Then comes the secret move. Finally
comes the magical reveal of the selected card in the magician's pocket.
Even though the audience experiences the whole trick as one magical unit, the
magician knows that it's really made up of all those little steps.
Likewise, we can apply the same analogy to things we'll learn in instrumental
rationality, to the mental habits we'll go over.

If we spent some time really looking at the little steps of coming up with examples, we
could describe it in detail. The skill of Generating Examples, with a reductionist view,
might look something like this:
Technique: Generating Examples
1. Imagine the "skeleton" of the concept you are trying to ﬁt an example
to. 
EX: Anne is trying to come up with an example of what is a System 1 process.
She knows it's about fast and sometimes mistaken thinking, so she uses that as
the "frame" to search for examples.
2. Look for things in your everyday life that ﬁt. 
EX: Anne thinks about things in her daily routine which don't require much
thought. "Maybe brushing my teeth?" she wonders.
3. Think about books, movies, or other pop culture if real life doesn't
prove fruitful. 
EX: Anne thinks about a movie about a character who always gets into trouble
because of their quick wit and fast tongue. "Hmm, maybe also the sort of social
responses we give count as S1 responses?" she thinks.
++++
The idea here is to describe any mental skill with enough granularity and detail, at the
5 second level. What I mean by that is that you should be able to describe such that
you'd both be able to go through the same steps a second time and teach someone
else.
That means having a very deep understanding of exactly what little steps you're going
through in your head to produce the skill.
Now of course most of us already know how to generate examples, so the above
"technique" formulation might seem a little alien, as it's already something we do
without much explicit, conscious input.
However, when we move on to more novel and complex habits of mind, techniques
that involve moving your brain in new ways, then having a good understanding that
these steps are things you do becomes quite important.
A basketball player doesn't strongly improve just by watching the NBA. Likewise,
ﬁguring out this instrumental rationality stuﬀ is not a spectator sport either. You need
to really go through the mental motions in your own head and act on them.
This is what I mean when I say that mental habits are procedural.
In addition to ﬁguring out the practicality and the little pieces, it's important to ﬁnd
opportunities to use these diﬀerent skills.
You can't get better at doing something unless you, y'know, actually do it.
++++
Realistic Expectations:

[An essay about having realistic expectations and looking past potentially harmful
framing eﬀects.]
There's this tendency to get frustrated with learning mental techniques after just a
few days. I think this is because people miss the declarative vs procedural distinction.
(But you hopefully won't fall prey to it because we've covered the distinction now.)
Once we liken the analogy to be more like that playing a sport, it becomes much
easier to see that any expectation of immediately learning a mental habit is rather
silly—after all, no one expects to master tennis in just a week.
So, when it comes to trying to conﬁgure your expectations, I suggest that you try to
renormalize your expectations by treating learning mental habits more like learning a
sport.
Keep that as an analogy, and you'll likely get fairly well-calibrated expectations for
learning all this stuﬀ.
Still, what, then, might be a realistic time frame for learning?
We'll go over habits in far more detail in a later section, but a rough number for now is
approximately two months. You can expect that, on average, it'll take you about 66
days to ingrain a new habit.
(There'll be a lot more on habits in Part 4.)
Similarly, instrumental rationality (probably) won't make you a god.
Disappointing, I know.
Still, in my experience, studying these areas has been super useful, which is why I'm
writing this at all. Your own mileage will vary depending where you are right now, but
this serves as the general disclaimer to keep your expectations within the bound of
reality.
Here, the main point is that, even though mental habits don't seem like they should
be more similar to playing a sport, they really are. There's something here about how
ﬁrst impressions can be rather deceiving.
For example, a typical trap I sometimes fall into is missing the distinction between
"theoretically possible" and "realistic".
I end up looking at the supposed 24 hours available to me everyday and then beating
myself up for not being able to harness all 24 hours to do productive work. "After all,"
my brain says, "that's all time you could be using to do things!"
But such a framing of the situation is inaccurate; things like sleep and eating are often
very essential to maximizing productivity for the rest of the hours! Just because it
looks like I could "in theory" get additional work time, self-care is also an important
factor that we easily miss!
So when diving in and practicing, try to look a little deeper when setting your
expectations. Bias towards pessimism. No one likes to hear it, but the chances of you
actually turning your life around at any given moment are likely slim.

That's just how things work. Disappointing, for sure, but that's all the more reason to
be suspicious if you've got too rosy expectations of how things will turn out.
First glances tend to be deceiving.
++++
Next essay

Instrumental Rationality 2: Planning
101
[Instrumental Rationality sequence 2/7.]
[This section goes over the planning fallacy, our cognitive bias of making overconﬁdent
predictions in our time estimates. It starts with an overview of the ﬁeld and moves into
some models of how human planning works. We'll move into three techniques to plan
better and end with some more practical suggestions.]
Introducing the Planning Fallacy:
[We go over the basics of how humans can make overconﬁdent predictions in their
planning. Some basic statistics to maybe scare you a little bit.]
Humans are often overconﬁdent, and perhaps for good reason.
Back on the savannah, overconﬁdence might have been an eﬀective strategy for
success. If you gave oﬀ the impression of being more capable than you really were,
then being overconﬁdent and bluﬃng could frighten stronger opponents and avoid
direct conﬂict.
When it comes to making plans in the modern day, however, overconﬁdence in
planning can be unhelpful. You might be able to convince everyone (including yourself)
that you'll ﬁnish that report in three days, but, if you don't put in the eﬀort, it'll still
really take you a week.
There's a lot of evidence that suggests that our thinking is often subject to the planning
fallacy, a tendency to make unrealistic predictions and plans.
Below is a scattering of stats and examples from diﬀerent ﬁelds to guide your intuitions
at the phenomenon I'm talking about:
First, some students were asked to predict when they were 99% sure they'd ﬁnish a
project. But when the researchers actually followed up with them, we found that only
about 45%, less than half of the students, had actually ﬁnished by their own predicted
times *1.
In a related study, students were asked to predict when they'd ﬁnish, "assuming
everything went as poor as it possibly could." Basically, their worst-case scenario. Yet,
only about 30% of students ﬁnished by their own self-appointed estimate *2.

In fact, similar results were also found in Japanese and Canadian cultures, giving
evidence that this is a human (and not US-culture-based) phenomenon. Students
continued to make overly optimistic predictions, even when they knew the task had
taken them longer last time *3.
I don't mean to just pick on students, though. The planning fallacy is present in many,
many sectors.
For example, an overview of public transportation projects found that most of them
were, on average, 20-45% above the estimated cost. Research has shown that these
poor predictions haven't improved at all in the past 30 years *4.
And there's no shortage of high-proﬁle examples, from the Scottish Parliament
Building, which cost 10 times more than expected, to the Denver International Airport,
which, by some estimates, took 16 months longer and $2 billion more than initially
anticipated.
Other ﬁelds like tech and ﬁnance have their own share of overconﬁdent estimates
which fail to come true, from the information technology sector's roughly 33% success
rate for on-time project completion, to CFOs making having grossly overconﬁdent
judgments *5 *6.
If you couple the above data with some of your own experiences with far-too optimistic
predictions, this hopefully paints a picture of how reality consistently fails to meet our
expectations.
My goal here is to drive home the point that you, just like everyone else, are also
susceptible to these errors in planning.
++++

Modeling the Planning Fallacy:
[We go over several models of how to think about the brain and the estimates it
makes. I think that the inside / outside view distinction is the most useful one, and it'll
be the one I focus on]
Here, we'll go over some simpliﬁed models of what's happening inside our heads when
the planning fallacy occurs.
First, there are some fairly basic potential explanations for our overly optimistic
estimates.
For one, we might just be misremembering the actual details of how things played out
in the past. It seems that we may underestimate how long things take us, and this can
even occur in our memories, which leads us to make messed-up estimates *7.
On another level, it seems that we just don't expect things to go wrong. Studies have
found that we're biased towards not looking at pessimistic scenarios *8.
There are lots of unknown unknowns in any situation, things we just won't see coming.
Yet, even if we know that unexpected events will occur, this doesn't move us to take
extra precautions.
We often just assume the best-case scenario when making plans, and we might miss
out on relevant outside information.
This leads us to the model of the inside view and the outside view, which is what I
think to be one of the best models for explaining this bias *9.
The inside view is the information you have about your speciﬁc project, or information
inside your head. It's the information that only someone inside the project would have.

Here are some examples of inside view thinking:
1. You are writing an essay. You consider your topic, how much you know about the
topic, and perhaps how much ink you have left in your pen. Then you predict how
long you think it'll take to ﬁnish writing the essay. 
2. You are running in a marathon. Halfway through, you check your energy level,
how sore your muscles are, and if you're hydrated. Then you make a prediction
about what place you'll ﬁnish. 
3. You just ﬁnished a very diﬃcult math quiz. You think about the speciﬁc problems
you had trouble with, the problems you felt were easy, and then you try to predict
what score you'll get on the quiz.
The inside view tends to focus on you. It's about your strengths, abilities, limits, and
things within your control. However, as any person in a traﬃc jam can tell you, it's
often the things beyond our control that have the greatest impact.
In these cases, the best we can do is to adapt to them as they show up.
In general, we seem to use inside view thinking when we make plans, and this is the
source of our overconﬁdence. We're focused on how we can help our project go right,
rather than the things that can make our project go wrong.
This intuitive planning strategy can miss out on the unknown unknowns that are out
there in the real world, leading us to make plans which fail to meet reality's standards.
This is where the outside view comes in.
The outside view is information about all projects similar to yours that have happened,
or what someone on the outside might say about your project. It's about how well you
are doing, compared to others doing something similar.
Where the inside view focuses on your individual strengths, the outside view looks at
averages, the environment, and the things around you.
Here are some examples of outside view thinking applied to the above examples:
1. You are writing an essay. Instead of considering the speciﬁc topic, you look back
to how long it took you to write essays in the past. On average, you ﬁnished
within 40-50 minutes, so you predict that you'll probably take about that long this
time. 
2. You are running in a marathon. Even though you feel pretty good, you see that
there are already 4 people ahead of you. Also, you ﬁnished 7th in the last few
marathons. So, chances are, you'll probably ﬁnish 6th or 7th place this time,
despite what your body is signaling to you. 
3. You just ﬁnished a very diﬃcult math quiz. The teacher said that most of the class
got close to a 60%. Even though you felt like you knew most of the answers, you
predict that you probably also got close to 60%, maybe a little higher.
With these examples, I hope you get the basic idea of the distinction between the two
ways of making plans.

Relating it back to the typical System 1 and System 2 model, the inside view is closer
to a S1 process, as it's our intuitive, default planning strategy. The outside view
requires some additional thought (and perhaps research), making it more of a S2-type
process.
++++
3 Techniques to Improve Planning:
We'll be covering three techniques to help with improving your plans: Murphyjitsu,
Reference Class Forecasting (RCF), and Back-planning (aka "backchaining").
1. Murphyjitsu is a little like using your brain's built-in system to analyze for
potential problems.
2. RCF is ﬂat-out using past history to improve your predictions.
3. Back-planning is like planning. Except it's done backwards.
++++
Murphyjitsu:
[Murphyjitsu is about using your intuitions to check for whether or not a plan will work.
It draws on your ability to implicitly store information in your gut feelings and is way
less magical than it sounds.]

Research:
The name Murphyjitsu comes from the infamous Murphy's Law: "Anything that can go
wrong, will go wrong."
Murphyjitsu is based oﬀ a strategy called a "premortem" or "prospective hindsight",
which basically means imagining the project has already failed and looking backwards
to see what went wrong *10.
But that can get a little complicated ("So you imagine yourself...in the future...looking
back at the past...to ﬁgure out how to act...in the present?).

So here's an alternative fun way to think of Murphyjitsu:
Say you're sitting at your desk, getting ready to write a report on intertemporal travel.
You're conﬁdent you can ﬁnish before the hour is over. What could go wrong? Closing
Facebook, you begin to start typing.
Suddenly, you hear a loud CRACK!
A burst of light ﬂoods your room as a ﬁgure pops into existence, dark and silhouetted
by the brightness behind it. The light recedes, and the ﬁgure crumples to the ground.
Floating in the air is a whirring gizmo, ﬁlled with turning gears. Strangely enough, your
attention is drawn from the gizmo to the person on the ground:
The ﬁgure has a familiar sort of shape. You approach, tentatively, and ﬁnd the splitting
image of yourself! The person stirs and speaks.
"I'm you from one week into the future," your future self croaks. Your future self tries
to tries to get up, but sinks down again.
"Oh," you say.
"I came from the future to tell you..." your temporal clone says in a scratched voice.
"To tell me what?" you ask. Already, you can see the whispers of a scenario forming in
your head...
Future You slowly says, "To tell you... that the report on intertemporal travel that you
were going to write... won't go as planned at all. It failed."
"Oh no!" you say.
Somehow, though, you aren't surprised...
At this point, what plausible reasons for your failure come to mind?
For example, if you're trying to write a blog post, you could imagine that you woke up
the next day and no words got written. When in that scenario, what is the plausible
explanation which explains things?
Maybe it's that you stayed out too late with friends, or that you forgot about the task,
or that you left your power cord in the oﬃce.
Whatever explanation, that is likely to be one of the most likely things that will derail
your blog post tonight. Now that you've done Murphyjitsu, you can try to patch the
problem by perhaps telling your friends that you need to get home by a certain time.
It turns out that putting ourselves in the future and looking back can help identify more
risks, or see where things can go wrong. Prospective hindsight has been shown to
increase our predictive power so we can make adjustments to our plans—before they
fail *11.
In short, you're trying to see likely potential failure modes, by doing a "surprise check"
with your gut by asking yourself the question "Would I be surprised if I learned that this
plan failed?"

It might feel a little weird to rely on your intuition or gut feeling to look for potential
failure modes. But remember that it's not just "coming out of nowhere"!. Your System 1
does have information. You've got a rich history of experiences to rely on (just from
being alive!), and the Murphyjitsu procedure is designed to try and take advantage of
those intuitions.
++++
Technique:
Here are the basic steps of Murphyjitsu:
1. Figure out your goal. This is the thing you want to make plans to do. 
EX: "First, let's say I decide to exercise every day. That'll be my goal." 
2. Write down which speciﬁc things you need to get done to make the
thing happen. (Make a list.) 
EX: "But I should also be more speciﬁc than that, so it's easier to tell what
'exercising' means. Let's decide that I want to go running on odd days for 30
minutes and do strength training on even days for 20 minutes. And I want to do
them in the evenings." 
3. Now imagine it's one week (or month) later, and yet you somehow didn't
manage to get started on your goal. (The visualization part here is
important.) Are you surprised? 
EX: "Now, let's imagine that it's now one week later, and I didn't go exercising at
all! What went wrong?" 
4. Why? (What went wrong that got in your way?) 
EX: "The ﬁrst thing that comes to mind is that I forgot to remind myself, and it
just slipped out of my mind" 
5. Now imagine you take steps to remove the obstacle from Step 4. 
EX: "Well, what if I set some phone / email reminders? Is that good enough?" 
6. Return to Step 3. Are you still surprised that you'd fail? If so, your plan
is probably good enough. (Don't fool yourself!) 
EX: "Once again, let's imagine it's one week later and I made a reminder. But
let's say I still didn't got exercising. How surprising is this?" 
7. If failure still seems likely, go through Steps 3-6 a few more times until
you "problem proof" your plan. 
EX: "Hmm, I can see myself getting sore and/or putting other priorities before it...
(Step 4). So maybe I'll also set aside the same time every day, so I can't easily
weasel out (Step 5). 
How do I feel now? (Back to Step 3) Well, if once again I imagine it's one week
later and I once again failed, I'd be pretty surprised. My plan has two levels of
fail-safes and I do want to do exercise anyway. Looks like it's good! (Done)"
++++
Plan-Bot: An Automated Murphyjitsu Tool:

If you want to try out a very simple web-app that walks you through the Murphyjitsu
prompt, I wrote an interactive series of question prompts that can be found here.
++++
Reference Class Forecasting (RCF):
[Reference Class Forecasting is about using past information to inform future
estimates. It's based oﬀ the assumption that getting a general sense for how plans for
tasks similar to yours will help give you a more unbiased estimate.]

Research:
Reference class forecasting (RCF) is all about using the outside view rather than our
optimistic inside view.
It's about using past history to inform our future estimates.
Often, we'll see all the ways that things can go right, but none of the ways things can
go wrong. By looking at past history—other people who have tried the same or similar
thing as us—we can get a better idea of how long things will really take.
Why does RCF do better than our naive planning processes? Basically, RCF works by
looking only at results.

This means that we can avoid any potential biases that might have cropped up if we
were to think it through normally. We're shortcutting right to the data, i.e. what actually
happened.
The rest of it is basic statistics; most people are close to average. So if we have an idea
of what the average looks like, we can be sure we'll be pretty close to average as well
*12 *13.
When you Google the average time or look at your own data, you're forming a
"reference class", i.e. a group of related things that can give you info about how long
similar projects tend to take. Hence, the name "reference class forecasting".
For example, if it usually takes me about 3 hours to ﬁnish homework (I use the web app
Toggl to track my time), then I'll predict that it will take me 3 hours today, too.
It's obvious that RCF is incredibly simple. It literally just tells you that how long
something will take you this time will be very close to how long it took you last time.
But that doesn't mean it's ineﬀective!
Often, the past is a good benchmark of future performance, and it's far better than any
naive prediction your brain might spit out.
++++
Technique:
Here are the steps for RCF:
1. Figure out what you want to do. 
EX: Brienne wants to design a logo for a nonproﬁt. 
2. See your records how long it took you last time.
EX: Last time, Brienne took about three hours to make the logo. 
3. That's your new prediction. 
EX: Brienne expects that it'll also take her three hours this time around. 
4. If you don't have past information, look for about how long it takes, on
average, to do our thing. (This usually looks like Googling "average time
to do X".) 
EX: Brienne Googles "average time to design a logo" and comes up with an
average of about 4 hours.
++++
RCF + Murphyjitsu Example:
In my own experience, I've found that using a mixture of Reference Class Forecasting
and Murphyjitsu to be helpful for reducing overconﬁdence in my plans.
When starting projects, I will often ask myself, "What were the reasons that I failed last
time?"
I then make a list of the ﬁrst three or four "failure-modes" that I can recall. I now make
plans to preemptively avoid those past errors.

(This can also be helpful in reverse—asking yourself, "How did I solve a similar diﬃcult
problem last time?" when facing a hard problem.)
Here's an example:
Say I'm writing a long essay (like this one) and I want to know how what might go
wrong. I've done several of these sorts of primers before, so I have a "reference class"
of data to draw from. So what were the major reasons I fell behind for those posts?
<Cue thinking>
"Hmm...it looks like I would either forget about the project, get distracted, or lose
motivation. Sometimes I'd want to do something else instead, or I wouldn't be very
focused. That's deﬁnitely happened in the past.
Okay, great. Now what are some ways that I might be able to "patch" those problems?
Well, I can deﬁnitely start by making a priority list of my action items. So I know which
things I want to ﬁnish ﬁrst. I can also do short 5-minute planning sessions to make sure
I'm actually writing. And I can do some more introspection to try and see what's up
with my motivation."
<End thinking>
So, yeah, that's a sort of snapshot of what my thoughts might look like in this situation.
++++
Back-Planning:
[Back-planning is a novel way of planning that starts from the end result and works
backwards, as the name suggests. It's also known as "backchaining" in some ﬁelds.]

Research:
Back-planning involves, as you might expect, planning from the end. Instead of
thinking about where we start and how to move forward, we imagine we're already at
our goal and go back to the start.
The experimental evidence for back-planning basically suggests that, when using this
technique, people will end up with more pessimistic (and thus realistic) time estimates.
Why? We're not 100% sure.
The general gist of these theories is that back-planning is a weird, counter-intuitive way
to think about things, which means it disrupts a lot of mental processes that can lead

to overconﬁdence *14.
This means that back-planning can make it harder to fall into the groove of the easy
"super optimistic best-case" planning we default to. Instead, we need to actually look
at where things might go wrong. Which is, of course, what we want.
In my own experience, I've found that going through a quick back-planning session can
help my intuitions "warm up" to my prediction more.
For example, I'll sometimes use RCF to get a more accurate time estimate, but it still
feels "oﬀ". Walking through the plan through back-planning can help all the parts of me
understand that it really will probably take longer.
++++
Technique:
Here are the steps for back-planning:
1. Figure out the task you want to get done. 
EX: "Right now, I want to host a talk at my school. I know that's the end goal." 
2. Imagine you're at the end of your task. 
EX: "So the end goal is me actually ﬁnishing the talk and taking questions." 
3. Now move backwards, step-by-step. What is the step right before you
ﬁnish? 
EX: "What happens right before that? Well, people would need to actually be in
the room. And I would have needed a room. 
4. Repeat Step 3 until you get to where you are now. 
EX: "Is that all? (Step 3). Also, for people to show up, I would have needed
publicity. Probably also something on social media. I'd need to publicize at least a
week in advance, or else it won't be common knowledge.
And what about the actual talk? I would have needed slides, maybe memorize my
talk. Also, I'd need to ﬁgure out what my talk is actually going to be on." 
5. Write down how long you think the task will now take you. 
EX: "Huh, thinking it through like this, I'd need something like 3 weeks to get it
done. One week for the actual slides, one week for publicity (at least), and one
week for everything else that might go wrong. 
That feels more 'right' than my initial estimate of 'I can do this by next week'." 
6. You now have a detailed plan as well as a better prediction! 
EX: "Hooray!"
++++
Conclusion:
We've gone over several ways in which planning can hopefully be improved with some
careful thinking. Hopefully I've showed that both your intuitions and reasoned analysis
can provide useful data.

I think many of the considerations I outlined above in planning are great to keep in
mind, but it's also quite unrealistic to expect you to remember all of them when
actually making plans.
I wholeheartedly endorse sacriﬁcing some of the detail for speed. Finding a way to run
these planning checks at the 5-second level is really what's probably going to be really
practical.
Happy planning!
++++
References (*):
1. Buehler, Roger, Dale Griﬃn, and Michael Ross. "Exploring the Planning Fallacy: Why
People Underestimate their Task Completion Times." Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 67.3 (1994): 366.
2. Buehler, Roger, Dale Griﬃn, and Michael Ross. "It's About Time: Optimistic
Predictions in Work and Love." European Review of Social Psychology Vol. 6, (1995): 1-
32.
3. Buehler, Roger, Dale Griﬃn. "Planning, Personality, and Prediction: The Role of
Future Focus in Optimistic Time Predictions." Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 92, (2003) 80-90
4. Flyvbjerg, Bent. "From Nobel Prize to Project Management: Getting Risks Right."
Project Management Journal 37.3 (2006): 5-15. Social Science Research Network.
5. Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey. "Managerial
Miscalibration." No. w16215. Quarterly Journal of Economics. (2010). Social Science
Research Network.
6. The Standish Group. "The Standish Group CHAOS Report." Project Smart (2014).
7. Roy, Michael M., Nicholas JS Christenfeld, and Craig RM McKenzie. "Underestimating
the Duration of Future Events: Memory Incorrectly Used or Memory Bias?."
Psychological Bulletin 131.5 (2005): 738.
8. Newby-Clark, Ian R., et al. "People Focus on Optimistic Scenarios and Disregard
Pessimistic Scenarios While Predicting Task Completion Times." Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied 6.3 (2000): 171.
9. Kahneman, Daniel, and Dan Lovallo. "Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive
Perspective on Risk Taking." Management Science 39.1 (1993): 17-31.
10. Klein, Gary. "Performing a Project Premortem." Harvard Business Review 85.9
(2007): 18-19.
11. Veinott, Beth. "Klein, and Sterling Wiggins,"Evaluating the Eﬀectiveness of the
Premortem Technique on Plan Conﬁdence,"." Proceedings of the 7th International
ISCRAM Conference (May, 2010).
12. Flyvbjerg, Bent. "From Nobel Prize to Project Management: Getting Risks Right."
Project Management Journal 37.3 (2006): 5-15. Social Science Research Network.

13. Flyvbjerg, Bent. "Curbing Optimism Bias and Strategic Misrepresentation in
Planning: Reference Class Forecasting in Practice." European Planning Studies 16.1
(2008): 3-21.
14. Wiese, Jessica, Roger Buehler, and Dale Griﬃn. "Backward Planning: Eﬀects of
Planning Direction on Predictions of Task Completion Time." Judgment and Decision
Making 11.2 (2016): 147.
Next essay

Instrumental Rationality 3: Interlude I
[Instrumental Rationality Sequence 3/7].
[Here, we'll cover two concepts: Acting into Uncertainty and Fading Novelty .
They're both sort of about two (generalizable, I hope) mental feelings (i.e. internal
experiences) that can occur when you start trying to act on any of the instrumental
rationality techniques.]
++++
Acting into Uncertainty:
[Acting into Uncertainty is about how it can feel scary to get started in environments
with incomplete information. It looks at why the feeling of vagueness might be
deceptively comforting, and then it dives into explication as a potential solution.]
For many areas of life, I think we shy away from confronting uncertainty and instead
ﬂee into the comforting non-falsiﬁability of vagueness.
Consider these examples:
1. You want to get things done today. You know that writing things down can help
you ﬁnish more things. However, it feels aversive to write down what you
speciﬁcally want to do. So instead, you don't write things down and instead just
keep a hazy notion of "I will do things today".
2. You try to make a conﬁdence interval for a prediction where money is on the
line. For example: "I am 90% sure Norway has between 100 and 1 billion
people". You notice yourself feeling uncomfortable, no matter what your bounds
are. Somehow, it feels bad to set down any number at all, which is accompanied
by a dread feeling of ﬁnality. 
3. You're trying to ﬁnd solutions to a complex, entangled problem. Coming up with
speciﬁc solutions feels bad because none of them seem to completely solve the
problem. So instead you decide to go one level up. You end up just thinking
about what properties a good solution should have in the ﬁrst place and ﬁnd
yourself throwing around buzzwords like "democracy" and "holistic workaround".
In each of the above examples, it feels like we move away from making speciﬁc claims
because that opens us up to speciﬁc criticism. But instead of trying to acknowledge
that, we retreat to fuzzily-deﬁned notions that allow us to incorporate any criticism
without having to really update.
In other words, there's a sense in which, in some areas of life, we're embracing
shoddy epistemology (EX: not wanting to validate or falsify our beliefs) because of a
fear of being shown wrong.
I think this potential failure is what fuels the badness when we confront uncertainty.

It seems useful to face this feeling of badness or aversion with the understanding that
this is what confronting uncertainty feels like. The best action doesn't always feel
comfortable and easy. It can just as easily feel aversive and ﬁnal.
Look for situations where you might be ﬂinching away from speciﬁcity by making
vacuous claims that don't say much at all.
When possible, try to explicate. Be speciﬁc.
Explicating and being speciﬁc opens up our plans and hypotheses to falsiﬁcation; it
leaves them vulnerable to being aﬀected by evidence. Remaining uncertain means we
can't be shifted either way because we never made a strong statement in the ﬁrst
place.
We want our plans to fall in the face of contrary evidence. We want goals that are
actually realistic. A vague goal means that we don't aren't required to specify what we
actually want to get done, which clearly makes it harder to make progress on them.
Plus, vague goals give you more excuses to wiggle out of your own promises:
In my own case, there's a secret part of me that is aversive to explicating; it wants to
stay in the vagueness. On some level, I think that if I just under-specify what I'll get
done for today, then that leaves open the possibility that I'll be able to somehow get
all my work done. But things don't actually work like that. It's important, then, to try
and decouple wishes from predictions.
So there's two things here:
One is about how, sometimes, the best action is actually still the one that feels
uncertain and scary because confronting uncertainty is just a feature of our existence.
And the other thing is about how being speciﬁc can be a good way to solve part of the
problem.
I claim that it's the atomic, mechanistic actions which lead to things getting acted on.
The real world runs on speciﬁcs—reality always has a Next Action. Thus, when we
explicate the felt meaning in our heads, we're also converting the nebulous feeling
into a format that's more workable in reality.
++++
Fading Novelty:
[Fading Novelty is about how the excitement of stuﬀ can wear oﬀ after a while. This
can make it harder to learn new stuﬀ after you've been exposed to it for a while, and
it seems like part of why Obvious stuﬀ gets discarded by our brains.]
Male mammals tend to exhibit a frenzy of mating when ﬁrst introduced to a female.
After some time, they lose interest. Until a new female is introduced, that is,
whereupon we tend to see renewed interest from the male.
This phenomenon is dubbed the Coolidge eﬀect.

I ﬁnd that the Coolidge eﬀect seems analogous to the idea of fading novelty—the
biological deﬁnition, that is—which is where something new eventually loses its
special sheen.
For example, say Carrie gets a new plush cat. She looks at it on her bedside, and it
has this sort of "glow" that makes it stand out compared to all her other things. Over
time, though, her cat plush fades into the background and it no longer feels special.
I think this is a fairly universal feeling, despite there appearing to be very little about
the high-level phenomena in the literature. (Which is why it's here in an Interlude
essay, rather than in a more well-researched essay. )
Other related ideas in this space include conditioning, tolerance, and acclimation;
basically, situations where what was once a stressor no longer really elicits much of a
response.
I'm interested in looking into fading novelty because it seems like part of the
pedagogical problem with learning rationality goes something like this:
Alice learns about back-planning as a new planning skill. Empowered, she starts
seeing ways to apply this idea everywhere. Armed with her new hammer, she makes
some headway; progress is happening!
Soon, though, realizes that the back-planning idea now feels merely commonplace in
her mind. The original feeling of "wow" has faded, and it feels less yummy to keep
using the strategy because it's no longer exciting. She stops using it, and there's a
general loss of excitement that used to be there.
As a result, I think that when we learn new insights, there is only a small window of
time to capitalize on the novelty factor before it starts to feel boring.
A "use it or lose it" phenomenon seems to happen, where either you
actually form some new habits as a result of the short-lived excitement, or it
falls, forgotten by the wayside.
One reason could be because the novelty of the insight has faded, making it seem
less exciting to use.
Now, to be clear, there are obvious reasons for wanting to keep fading novelty in
humans:
Fading novelty is our ﬁrst line of defense against getting stuck in loops. If repeated
exposure to the same stimuli in normal contexts always triggered the same response,
we'd likely get caught in repetitive actions where we wouldn't feel incentivized to go
oﬀ in the world and explore.
Secondly, there'd likely be sensory overload. We'd likely be overwhelmed with the
novelty of everything all the time, which would undoubtedly make it far harder to
focus on the important things.
However, I think it's important to at least acknowledge that whenever learning
rationality, which is insight-based, fading novelty can reduce the "yumminess" we
initially feel towards practicing rationality techniques.

I also think it might be useful to have a few ways to, if not disable, but at least
somewhat counter the fading novelty for things that we want to keep feeling new and
exciting.
Here are some ideas I've brainstormed, along with some examples: (Note that the
ideas below all sort of skirt around creating new novelty and don't exactly give a good
solution.)
1. Going Meta:
I touched on this in the end of the In Defense of the Obvious essay, but this basically
consists of noticing your lack of enthusiasm after the novelty fades and knowing that
it was going to happen like this. I don't think this brings back the sheen of novelty, but
it feels related, so I included it here.
EX: Steve signed up for a diﬃcult calculus course. After the initial excite of
manipulating arcane symbols fades, Steve realizes the class is a lot of work. Still, he
knew this when he signed up, so he's able to gather back some of his initial ﬁre by
knowing everything is All Part Of The Plan.
2. Quick Feedback/Incentives/Rewards:
I also think there's a sense in where, if the action you're doing produces some sort of
reward/incentive, you'll probably also feel compelled to do it, in a sense independent
of novelty. Think checking Facebook, which keeps you craving that delicious red
number hanging on the right edge of the globe icon and how satisfying it feels to click
it, over and over, time and time again. We'll come back to this a little more in section
4 about habits.
EX: When I was practicing coin magic in front of a mirror, getting instant visual
feedback on my sleight of hand was immediately rewarding, which kept me practicing,
even when the novelty of the trick itself faded.
3. Habituate It:
Obviously if you've managed to turn the task into a habit, then you don't need to
worry about all this "cultivating novelty" stuﬀ. You'll just end up...doing it. The next
section, Habits 101, will go into far more detail.
EX: Turning journaling into a daily habit so I don't need to rely on the motivation boost
from novelty.
4. Contrasting
Humans are pretty relative. We compare things with regards to our immediate past as
reference points. The idea here is that you'd try to reset your "zero-points" for
diﬀerent things by alternating between ascetic and normal states to improve
appreciation of the basic stuﬀ.
EX: Deliberately not thinking much for a few days to improve appreciation of thinking.
Or, deliberately fasting to improve the taste of food.

Next essay

Instrumental Rationality 4.1: Modeling
Habits
[Instrumental Rationality Sequence 4.1/7.]
[This is part 1 of a 3-part sequence on habits, which is itself part of the greater
Instrumental Rationality Sequence. This was initially one monstrous article; in the
interests of readability, I've decided to split it into three essays.]
Outline:
The Habits 101 mini-sequence is broken up into 3 sections:
1. Introduction, Models, and Statistics:
We cover a basic model of how habits work, three of their properties (insensitivity
to reward changes, independence of intentions, and automaticity), and some
closing remarks on base rates for habituation.
2. Techniques for Creating Habits:
We cover three techniques for habit creation: Trigger Action Planning (TAPs),
Systematic Planning (which has three sub-techniques), and Scaling Up. 
3. Techniques for Breaking Habits and Conclusion:
We cover two techniques for breaking habits: Going Upstream and Substitution
(which has two sub-techniques).
(The current evidence base has many more interventions for forming habits than
breaking them, so that's why there's an asymmetry between parts 2 and 3. Also, this is
probably just a good thing to keep in mind, the fact that forming habits is easier than
breaking existing ones.)

++++
Introduction:
People, as the saying goes, are creatures of habit. Many of our actions every day are
repeated often, typically without much thought.
This type of thoughtlessness, though, isn't necessarily bad. Habits can help reduce
cognitive load, allowing us to get through the day. Imagine if you had to explicitly
weigh the pros and cons of behavior like ﬂushing the toilet every single time you did
them.
Making in-depth, reasoned decisions all the time can be very costly in terms of both
time and attention. Habits allow us to compartmentalize certain behaviors, so that our
energy and focus can move to other, perhaps more important, things.
A frequent part of our lives, habits make up at least roughly 40% of our everyday
activities, which thus makes them a strong candidate to target when we're thinking
about behavior change *1.
Knowledge about exactly how habits work, how we can create new ones, and how we
can remove old ones thus seems very useful because they represent a way of
providing beneﬁt continuously over time. It's a little like your time spent learning in
school: while the actual knowledge may soon fade, the automatic response patterns
you develop can you serve you well for a lifetime.
My goal here is twofold: One is to give an overview of the mechanisms behind habits,
and two is to give evidence-backed concrete techniques to aﬀect them.
++++

The Standard Habit Model:
Roughly speaking, the standard deﬁnition of a habit is that of "an automatic behavior
that is cued by context from the situation" *4 †1.
Basically, habits can be thought of as your default responses to diﬀerent situations.
This model for habits is composed of two parts: the context cue and the response.
The context cue, also called the "trigger" or "situation", is what ﬁrst kicks oﬀ the
entire process. Context cues are typically external things in the environment, from
people to sensory details to preceding actions.
Once the cue occurs, the response is generated.
The response, also called the "action", is the behavior that follows the cue. Responses
are typically small, atomic actions, but there is some research suggesting that a series
of actions can be "chunked" together into a unit that follows from the response *5.
(However, we also know that actions which require more thought and conscious eﬀort
don't become habitual, even when repeated in the same context *6. Thus, I'll be
recommending simpler responses when we get to creating our own habits.)
This [Context cue] → [Response] model is the core of how habits work.
While this model might seem obvious or simplistic, I'd like to stress the usefulness of
this deﬁnition. This model allows for much of what we intuitively label as "habits" to ﬁt
this template of [Context cue] → [Response].
Here are some examples of how typical habits ﬁt under this model:

1. Ring! Your alarm shakes you awake. In response, your arm slaps the alarm, hitting
the Snooze button, and you go back to sleep. 
[Context cue] Shrill sound of alarm going oﬀ. 
[Response] Turn it oﬀ and go back to sleep. 
2. "Hey!" Someone asks you "How are you doing?" and you instantly respond with
"Good, you?" 
[Context cue] The words "How are are you doing?"
[Response] Immediately saying "Good, you?"
3. Beep beep! You open the car door and get inside. After stepping into the car, your
hands are already looking for the seatbelt. 
[Context cue] Opening the car door. 
[Response] Putting on the seatbelt.
Moreover, I think this model is important in that it stresses how much of our behavior
isn't directly under our control. It highlights how habits can be seen as a way of
outsourcing our behavior to the environment.
There's a very real sense in which the central point of control shifts from internal to
external.
++++
But how exactly do habits form in the ﬁrst place?
In simpliﬁed terms, the mechanism behind how habits form looks like this:
1. Perform an action that isn't too complex. 
EX: You ﬂoss your teeth.
2. Keep performing the action in a stable context. 
EX: You always ﬂoss your teeth after brushing. 
3. Your brain begins to make associations between the context when the
action is performed and the action itself. 
EX: <Insert your brain activity here.> 
4. Continue performing the behavior frequently in the context. 
EX: Richard keeps up his ﬂossing habit after he brushes his teeth. 
5. Over time, the entire habit loop becomes internalized and largely
automatic. 
EX: Richard ends up with a ﬂossing habit.

Much of the actual complexity is in Step 3, where our brains are able to somehow
store the information about both the context cue and response together. There's a
question here of "How are habits actually stored in the brain?"
There are two suggested mechanisms for how this actually happens: motivated cuing
and direct cuing *7.
The ﬁrst mechanism, motivated cuing, suggests that certain cues can cause us to act
because we anticipate a reward as a result of our actions.
Thus, the cue itself brings to mind a sense of "desiredness" which leads us to act.

A good example is notiﬁcations on Facebook. Many people feel a nagging draw to click
on the red notiﬁcation button as soon as they see it, like a sort of mental itch they need
to scratch. There's a two-step phenomenon here, something like [See Facebook
notiﬁcation] -> [Click on it].
Motivated cuing says that this is because past experience with the cue (i.e. the red
notiﬁcation icon) has led to rewards (i.e. information about online activity that involves
you).
This means that one way habits could come about is by triggering a motivation to act
when we experience just the situation itself (even if the accompanying reward hasn't
shown up yet).
So it sounds plausible enough. But how do know something like this is actually
happening in the brain? One good piece of evidence is a classic study involving
monkeys and juice that you might have seen in a diﬀerent context.
Here's what happened: We started with some monkeys, some juice, and a light. We
trained the monkeys to push a lever when they saw the light ﬂash, which would then
reward them with the juice. When the monkeys received juice, we saw a spike of brain
activity (as we might have expected).
Eventually, though, we saw the monkeys' brain activity shift. Rather than spiking when
they received the juice, we began to see the spike when they merely saw the light. In
other words, the monkeys seemed to react to the context cue that signaled the reward
rather than the reward itself *8.
Basically, this means that one way habits could come about is by triggering a
motivation to act when we experience certain context cues.
However, I think the motivated cuing model is unsatisfactory for several reasons. Many
of our routines don't always have well-deﬁned rewards, like folding laundry or drying
oﬀ with a towel. Additionally, as we'll see in the next section, rewards seem to have an
overall negative eﬀect on habit formation.
This is where the second model, direct cuing, comes in. Direct cuing suggests that
when we perform the same actions often enough, one after another, a link will form
between them.
For example, consistently putting on the seatbelt after getting into the car can lead to
an association forming as we chunk the two actions in our brains, one after another.
Thus, once we get into the car, our next automatic step is to look for the seatbelt.
Other simple actions are things like tying our shoelaces right after we put on our shoes
or using the same conversation starters (EX: "Have you seen anything good lately?")
with the same friend again and again.
In direct cuing, the most important consideration is repetition.
But didn't I say earlier that frequency wasn't enough? And how does the brain know
which actions are the ones to chain together to form habits anyway?
To answer the ﬁrst one, I hope I've made clear that, while frequency or repetition isn't
the whole story, it's an important piece. There are other important factors like a stable
context which also seem to important to habit formation.

As for the second one, I'm actually not quite sure. All I know is that in procedural
memory (the part of memory responsible for our actions) something called Hebbian
learning happens. And Hebbian learning is a mechanism for neurons to link together
after they ﬁre in sequence *9.
So this is a rough idea of how linked actions or thoughts could form habits in the brain
using the direct cuing model. It's deﬁnitely on shakier ground than motivated cuing.
However, I think that direct cuing still seems a little more plausible because it's able to
(sort of) model a greater range of habit formation, while motivated cuing is stuck to a
stricter type of habit.
(Ultimately, I just want to stress that I am not an expert in neuroscience. Please take
both explanations as my humble attempt at a plain English translation. In addition to
simpliﬁcations I made to aid in explanation, I'm sure I also made a few straight-up
errors along the way.)
++++
Habit Properties:
Apart from the Standard Habit Model, there's some additional detail that I think is
worth a deeper look. Habits have several interesting properties that set them apart
from other behaviors. We'll be going over how habits are insensitive to reward
changes, independent of intentions, and automatic defaults.
Insensitivity to Reward Changes:
One property of habits is that they are largely insensitive to reward changes, meaning
the habit persists even when the rewards are altered or removed *10.
As evidence, there was one study where we trained people to press a button for a food
reward. Yet, even when the reward was removed, we saw that they continued to
respond by pressing the button *11.
This gives some insight into why using only rewards and incentives usually isn't enough
to change your habits. Once you've internalized the habit loop, changes to the
outcome don't have much eﬀect on altering your behavior.
Hold on, though. Are all incentives really worthless? Surely people are more likely to act
on certain behaviors if you pay them, right?
Well, we do see that ﬁnancial incentives, as one example of a reward, actually are often
good at encouraging short-term activities. Compared to a control group, we see that
people who receive incentives are more likely to perform the target behavior.
But once the rewards stop, the behavior often does not habituate *12. For example, a
recent study with over 1,000 subjects examined whether paying people to go to the
gym would lead to increased gym habits. Alas, we found that about two months after
the payment stopped, the increase in behavioral frequency went back down to roughly
pre-incentive levels *13.
As a ﬁnal piece of evidence, we often see that drug addicts continue to use substances,
even when such behavior turns self-destructive †2. This has also been replicated in

animal studies, where rats continue to respond habitually, even when the incentive is
changed to a disincentive (EX: a poison) *14.
The takeaway here is that simply changing rewards isn't enough to create or break
habits.
++++
Independence of Intentions:
A common dichotomy for behavior is that between "goal-directed actions" and
"habitual actions".
Our intentions, i.e. our desires and thoughts, do a good job of predicting which goal-
directed behaviors we'll carry out. Goal-directed behavior refers to the category of
actions where we act consciously on our preferences.
On the ﬂip side, habitual behavior is quicker and largely unaﬀected by rewards, as we
covered above *15. They are largely independent of your intentions, meaning that they
persist even if you desire for the habit to stop.
(Such a view has many parallels to other dual-process theories like System 1 and
System 2, popularized by Daniel Kahneman in his phenomenal book Thinking Fast and
Slow.)
In the earlier example with drug use, for example, it's quite plausible to assume that
the addict would have liked to stop due to the negative eﬀects of continued use, but
still found it hard to quit.
We see that one's intentions only aﬀect behavior when the habit is weak. For example,
people's intentions to purchase fast food only aﬀected their actual purchases in the
absence of a strong habit *16. When habits become well-developed, intentions matter
little.
On the ﬂip side, several studies have shown that in new, unfamiliar contexts, our habits
become disrupted, and our intentions once again become a stronger guide to behavior
*17. We'll explore this dynamic later in the form of a technique called Cue Disruption in
to help with creating and breaking habits.
Thus, there's a sort of inverse relationship here between one's intentions and one's
habits.
Here's a visual:

When habits are not well-established, intentions are a strong determinant of behavior.
When habits are well-established, intentions become irrelevant *18.
But the important takeaway here is that simply "intending" to change your habits isn't
enough.
++++
Automatic Defaults:
The last important property of habits is their automaticity. As alluded to earlier, habits
operate without much conscious control. Though they might be deliberately
overridden, they are what we default to in the absence of cognitive eﬀort.
Indeed, we see that when people become distracted, and their willpower depleted, that
their habits take over, even in situations where a more reasoned decision might have
been optimal *19 †3.
This also helps explain why rewards don't do much to inﬂuence habitual behavior:
Incentives often work best when they are deliberately considered, but the automatic
nature of habits means that they occur without much deliberation.
Thus habits (due to their automaticity) can be thought to bypass the explicit
consideration process (which is also where rewards hold the greatest weight).
The automaticity of habits is a double-edged sword:

If we're not careful, habits can show up when we don't want them to. These are
referred to as "action slips", and common examples are situations like driving along the
same route to one's workplace on a Sunday or calling people "Dad" (even when they
aren't your father) *18.
On the other hand, habits can often free our time and attention to focus on other
things. It's what allows our thoughts to drift even when we're driving on the road.
Sometimes, the best performance in an art or sport comes from this automaticity. In a
basketball game, for example, there's little time to think over every shot; good form
and accuracy must be automatic.
++++
Habit Statistics:
Before we dive into some evidence-based interventions to create and break habits, I
think it's useful to quickly look at some base-rate statistics. To avoid getting any
unrealistic expectations on how long it'll take for some of this stuﬀ to work, I think
some Reference Class Forecasting is in order.
How long does it really take to form a habit?
Well, it varies. One study of around 100 people going to the gym found that about half
of the people developed habits in about 40-50 days *21. An earlier study using a
diﬀerent methodology (and a smaller pool of people) found that the individual times
varied very greatly, but the average time worked to be about 66 days *22.
(Stats for habit creation were actually fairly hard to mind, so pardon that there's only
two sources for this section. Deﬁnitely happy to update if someone ﬁnds additional
info)
Thus, for a conservative estimate, you want to scale your expectations to something in
the ballpark of about two months. That's a long-ish time. Probably longer than what
most people naively estimate, I suspect.
Also, in the second study, we found that only about half of the people even formed
habits at all. This means the 66 day ﬁgure only came from the people who even
succeeded in the ﬁrst place.
This also means that if you tried to start a habit right now, your chances of sticking
with a habit would only be about 50%.

But fear not! Starting with the next section, we'll be going over obvious-but-still-useful-
advice cleverly disguised as special techniques, to improve your chances. My goal is
that, by the end of this Habits 101 primer, you'll be far better informed and in a much
better position to handle things.
I can't make any concrete promises, but it does seem plausible to me that making a
habit could perhaps be ingrained in about 30 days, if you take a focused, intentional
stance towards the endeavor.
++++
Next Essay

Instrumental Rationality 4.2: Creating
Habits
[Instrumental Rationality Sequence 4.2/7]
[Part two of a three-part series of habits.]
[We go over three techniques for creating habits: TAPs, Systematic Planning, and
Scaling Up.]
Techniques: Creating Habits
[The Techniques section has been broken up into sections: one on creating new
habits and one on breaking existing habits . They are split up based on what they
do rather than what they are because I think it makes more sense.
Splitting things up by function allows the given examples for the techniques to be more
focused on one of the two uses at a time, which I think makes the explanations easier
to understand.]
As we touched upon in an earlier section, the process by which habits form, when
simpliﬁed, looks roughly something like this:
1. Figure out what you want to do.
2. Identify the situation where you want the action to occur.
3. Actually perform said action in said situation.
4. Repeat the [Context cue → Response] loop until habituation occurs.
Therefore, from a theoretical standpoint, a useful intervention would try to aﬀect at
least one of the above steps.
The three evidence-backed techniques we'll go over are Trigger Action Plans (TAPs),
Systematic Planning, and Scaling Up.
Often, the best results occur when they're all used in tandem, as they each aﬀect
diﬀerent steps of habit formation.
++++
Trigger Action Plans (TAPs):
[TAPs are a way of framing intentional habit creation by focusing on both a salient
trigger (i.e. context cue) and an action (i.e. response). They are well-backed by over
two decades of research and build oﬀ the standard habit model.]

Research:
Trigger Action Planning is a technique by CFAR that is an adaptation of the
implementation intention technique by psychologist Peter Gollwitzer.
Implementation intentions are also known as "if-then plans" because they take the
form of a conditional, not unlike those used in programming, where one thing follows
another. Basically it's a way of chaining together actions and situations.
In writing, it roughly looks like:
"I intend to do action X when I encounter situation Y!"
As an example, a typical implementation intention for eating healthier might look like:
"I intend to ﬁll up half my plate with veggies whenever I am at a self-serve restaurant."
Compared to many other behavioral change interventions, implementation have a
stronger evidence base, and they're simple to put into practice.
In a meta-analysis of over 90 studies involving implementation intentions, we found
that they "had a positive eﬀect of medium‐to‐large magnitude ([eﬀect size] = 0.65) on
goal attainment" *23.
Thus, as one would expect, research that shows people who make implementation
intentions have a far higher success rate of achieving their target behavior compared
to people who merely hold normal intentions (EX: "I intend to do X") *24.
CFAR's Trigger Action Plan model builds on the implementation intention model and
tailors it to the standard habit model, focusing on selecting concrete context cues and
speciﬁc actions †4.
++++

Technique:
TAPs combine what we know about the standard habit model of a context cue paired
with a response with the if-then nature of implementation intentions.
Trigger Action Planning has us specify speciﬁcally when and how we'd like to behave
via a Trigger and an Action. It deliberately utilizes the same process that our habits
naturally arise, allowing us to intentionally create new habits.
A TAP takes the form of:
When [Trigger X] happens, I will perform [Action Y]. Schematically, it's almost identical
to the implementation intention setup. But the TAP model stresses a few diﬀerent
factors.
Here's a step-by-step walkthrough of how to make your own TAP:
1. Identify an Action you want to do. 
EX: "Go jogging more."
2. Find a concrete sensory Trigger for the situation where you want the
action to happen. 
EX: "The feeling of the coarse rope that opens my curtains in the morning." 
3. Describe the Action you'd like to perform, in detail. Be speciﬁc about
the action you'd like to. 
EX: "Pick up my jogging shoes and walk outside the door to begin jogging." 
4. Put the Trigger and Action in a "When [Trigger], then [Action]" loop. 
EX: "When [I feel the rough coarseness of my curtain rope,] then [I'll go grab my
jogging shoes and open the front door]." 

5. Write the TAP down somewhere you can ﬁnd it again. 
EX: Having a digital or physical "TAPs List" document can be a very strong way to
make it easy to review which habits you're currently training. If you end up
forgetting the cue or action, then it's obvious you won't be able to practice the
behavior. 
6. Mentally rehearse the TAP at least 5 times. 
EX: Actually take the several minutes to do some visualizations—going over it in
your mind helps you recognize the Triggers when they show up in the real world.
Speciﬁcity and concreteness are very useful here because a more salient cue is easier
to recognize. Thus, for any TAP, the best Triggers are the ones that are a clear sensory
sensation you can recognize. You don't have to be limited by external cues, though;
this can also be applied to internal sensations if you're noticing them.
As an example, if you're trying to avoid snapping at someone when they irritate you,
you can try to break down the feelings right after they speak. Maybe it feels like a
tightening in your chest, or a sinking feeling in your stomach.
The important thing here is to describe the internal feeling with enough detail such that
you can recognize it the next time it happens.
Questions to perhaps ask yourself are "Where in my body do I feel the sensation?" and
"What does the sensation feel like it's doing inside?"
Good places to insert TAPs are at the end of existing routines, a procedure called
piggybacking. We see that people who put their implementation intentions at the end
of habits they already have, like deciding to ﬂoss right after brushing, are more
successful *25.
Thus, TAPs can themselves be the Trigger for future TAPs.
The most important thing is that both the Trigger and Action are speciﬁc enough such
that you just do it without thinking. Vaguely-speciﬁed Actions are not as good as well-
quantiﬁed ones because you need to spend time trying to remember what it means.
For example, say we have this TAP:
Trigger: "When I ﬁnish a reading an online article..."
→
Action: "then I will summarize it."
Both the Trigger and Action could be made more speciﬁc. Going into more detail, a
perhaps improved version of the above might look like:
Trigger: "When I click the red 'X' to close a window after reading an online article..."
→
Action: "then I will set a 5 minute timer. For the next 5 minutes, I'll type out a
summary of what I just read on Microsoft Word."

I think the second formulation is better because it's more speciﬁc about what the
Trigger is, and it also unpacks the word "summarize" by turning it into a more concrete
set of actions.
Oftentimes, like above, it can be good enough to let the Action part of your TAP be the
start of a longer action chain.
Above, the 5 minute timer is merely a way to get started. After the 5 minutes are up,
you can continue writing your summary, especially if you ﬁnd yourself in the middle of
something interesting.
Likewise, in the earlier exercising example, the Action simply has you go through the
front door. But once that happens, the TAP doesn't need to worry about describing the
actual jogging; once you're outside, the rest of your body can take over.
For both of these examples, TAPs are used as a way to simply get started in the ﬁrst
place.
In terms of habits, TAPs help you get started on things you already wanted to do, but
might otherwise have forgotten. They're a type of reminder of sorts. You'll typically
want to use them on things that you would feel driven to do if you had the opportunity
to act on them in the ﬁrst place.
++++
TAPs Examples:
To get more of a feel for TAPs, here are four additional examples of Trigger Action Plans
that I use. I'll admit that they don't conform exactly to the ideal TAP model, but such is
the process of translating from theory to practice. Still, I think they help give a better
idea of what TAPs might look like in practice for you.
To-Do List TAP:
My memory isn't perfect, and I often need to remember things that randomly pop into
my head that take the form of to-dos. For example, "talk to Daniel", "send this email",
or "purchase more pens".
To help with this, I have the Todoist app downloaded on my phone, and I use this TAP:
Trigger: "When I think of something I need to do..."
→
Action: "then I will open up Todoist on my phone and put it in."
After doing this TAP a few times, it's become far more automatic; once I think of
something, my next logical thought is, "Okay, now let me put it into Todoist." While this
doesn't go all the way (after all, I still need to actually do the item), just having this TAP
has made it far less likely that to-dos slip through the cracks in my mind.
++++

Conversation TAP:
In conversations, I'm not always on top of things. It can be easy for me to zone out, as I
think of something, and then all I hear are meaningless word-shaped sounds. In the
past, I'd often want to ask the other party to repeat what they just said, but by the time
I ﬁnished deliberating whether or not to ask, more words would have been said, and I'd
be even further behind in the conversation.
Now I have a TAP for these sorts of situations:
Trigger: "When I hear sounds that should probably be be words but which feel like
they have no meaning..."
→
Action: "then I will immediately respond, 'Sorry, my bad! I didn't quite understand.
Could you say that again using diﬀerent words?'"
In my experience, people are largely forgiving if you're genuinely trying to stay focused
on the conversation, and I'm all for little hacks that make communication better.
A related issue for me is when someone says something that I understand on a S2
level, i.e. I know what all the words in the sentence mean, but I still don't have a good
idea of what they mean by such a sentence. In these types of situations, I have a
similar TAP:
Trigger: "When someone says something that doesn't give me a clear mental
picture..."
→
Action: "Then I will immediately say, 'Sorry, I'm not sure I follow. What's an example of
that?'"
Hopefully the Trigger here makes sense. I often think in terms of quick mental pictures.
As the other person is speaking, I've got some visuals that correspond to the words
they're saying. It's not exactly like I'm imagining a mental movie as they're speaking,
but it's a little similar.
Therefore, if someone says something that doesn't lead to a mental image, this is a
good sign for me that I probably don't understand as much as I thought I did. Hence
the Action in response to ask for more examples, which can hopefully make their point
more concrete.
++++
Journaling TAP:
This TAP is a good way to remind myself to journal, and I've successfully been using a
variant of it for several years; I've been journaling daily since about 2014. It's an
example of piggybacking in that it uses the ending of an existing routine as the trigger.
Trigger: "When I ﬁnish brushing my teeth..."
→

Action: "I will go and write down today's events in my journal."
Brushing my teeth is already an invariant in my schedule, so that makes it a good
Trigger to build new routines oﬀ of. Like I mentioned earlier about TAPs being used to
initiate action, the Journaling TAP is used to get myself in a position to start writing.
Once I'm automatically in position, my more conscious thinking can take over, dictating
what I actually write. The TAP is used to make sure I get there in the ﬁrst place without
much eﬀort.
++++
Actually Practicing: Make Your Own TAP
Going over a technique like TAPs in your head can be useful, but the trick is to really
use it in the real world. Thus, it's very, very strongly recommended that you take the
next 10 minutes to try out the following exercise:
1. Grab a piece of paper and a pen.
2. Set a 10 minute timer.
3. Create a TAP, following the steps already outlined above.
4. Make sure you actually walk it through at least 5 times in your head!
Sure, you could always try out a TAP later, but this is a natural stopping point before we
move on. Meaning that this is an especially good opportunity for you to stop reading,
take 10 minutes, and actually start making your own TAPs.
++++
Systematic Planning:
[Systematic Planning is a synthesis of interventions based around planning and
monitoring. It focuses on additional ways to increase habit strength and frequency by
building oﬀ the TAP model.]
Research:
Systematic Planning draws from both two interventions: action planning and active
monitoring.
Action planning, as the name very clearly informs us, is a form of planning *26. It
involves trying to answer questions like "What barriers would prevent me from carrying
out my intended behavior? How can I remove those barriers?"
In essence, it's a very top-down approach to ﬁguring out behavior change. When you're
action planning, you're literally just planning for the action. You're trying to make the
task as frictionless as possible for Future You by identifying potential problems and
making contingency plans.
Given that we've already covered how to plan better, we can apply those lessons here.

All our previous tools like Murphyjitsu and Reference Class Forecasting once again
come into play.
(Five second summary: Murphyjitsu asks us to imagine the most common failure modes
for our plans by ﬁrst assuming that they'll fail. Reference Class Forecasting says we
should rely on past information to make more accurate predictions.)
An example of action planning might look like this:
You'd like to stop watching television. So you ask yourself whether or not you'd be
surprised if you went all of tomorrow without watching television. Your gut says no
because Game of Thrones is on. So you decide to hide your remote and check your
surprise level again.
Maybe this time you'd be more surprised if you found a way to still watch television.
Maybe not.
Either way, the point here is that action planning allows you to perform these constant
feasibility checks to see if you'd really be able to perform the target behavior.
Active monitoring refers to the act of checking in to track your progress on a habit
and seeing how far along you are.
Both action planning and active monitoring take a sort of outside view, where you're
evaluating things without taking part in them. In contrast, TAPs are about being able to
respond in the moment; they provide more of an inside view. Compared to action
planning and active monitoring, TAPs are more reactive than evaluative.
For example, someone doing active monitoring on their vegetable-eating habit might
spend some time every day tracking their meals. They might look at how many meals
had vegetables, keeping track of their progress over time.
Both action planning and active monitoring have been shown to increase uptake of
desired behavior. Action planning has been shown to be eﬀective in several studies,
including longer-term eﬀects *26. And a meta-analysis of monitoring in 138 studies
showed that it had a small-medium eﬀect size (0.4) on actual goal attainment *42.
Basically, we have the unsurprising result that making plans and writing things down
helps make it more likely that people actually get things done.
++++
Technique:
As a technique, TAPs play the role of answering the question "How can I form
intentional habits?"
Conversely, Systematic Planning as a technique is about answering the question "How
do I make sure I actually use my TAPs?"
As a result, Systematic Planning is less about providing an alternative model for
forming habits. Rather, it's about providing additional useful considerations when using
the TAP model. This also means that it's a combination of ideas rather than just one
thing.

First, though, there's something interesting to note about how planning and habits,
Murphyjitsu and TAPs in particular, are related:
You can run Murphyjitsu when making a new TAP, but you can also make a
TAP out of Murphyjitsu.
An example of using Murphyjitsu when making a new TAP might look like this:
Say you would like to check email more on your phone. You make a TAP that looks like
[Open phone] → [Check email]. Unsure if your TAP will be successful, you imagine that
it's a week later and you didn't start developing your habit.
Using Murphyjitsu, you ask yourself, "What is the most plausible reason that this TAP
didn't stick?" In response, your internal simulation of events tells you that it's likely the
Trigger wasn't salient enough. So you update your TAP with a more speciﬁc Trigger.
An example of making a TAP out of Murphyjitsu might look like this:
Say that as you tell your friend what time you'll meet them at the park, you pause—
something about the situation feels odd. Internally, a TAP ﬁres oﬀ: [Give a time
estimate] → [Imagine one thing that might cause a delay].
As a result, you end up adding an extra ten minutes to your estimate to account for
potential traﬃc. While what you're doing isn't exactly the whole Murphyjitsu process,
you're able to get most of the value by turning it into a quick TAP that habituates.
So there's something interesting going on here where you can feed one technique into
the other and vice-versa. They complement each other in part because each process
involves the other—planning well is a habit, but you can also ﬁgure out how to make
your habits better if you do some planning.
I bring this up to introduce the idea of meta-TAPs, that is to say, TAPs which are
designed to help out your other TAPs.
As a collection of considerations, I think that Systematic Planning is clearer to
understand when the concepts are shown as practical meta-TAPs you can start doing
right away.
Thus, I'll be framing Systematic Planning as a series of three techniques: Active
Monitoring, TAP Everything, and Murphyjitsu Your TAPs.
++++
Systematic Planning 1: Active Monitoring
As we covered, actively monitoring the progress on your habits is a strong way to
improve your habits.
You're checking to see whether or not you've been executing your TAPs and mentally
rehearsing the Triggers. You're taking the time to sit down and track where you are in
regards to learning all of your TAPs.
Like most other routine activities, Active Monitoring is probably best done piggybacking
oﬀ an existing part of your schedule. I'd recommend the mornings as an especially

good time, as you can review your TAPs once more before you go oﬀ on your day,
where you'll start to see all your potential Triggers.
While everyone's actual monitoring questions might be diﬀerent, here is a sample set
of questions you can feel free to use:
1. What is the TAP you are trying to learn?
2. Did you do it sometime in the last week? Write down at least 1 example
situation.
3. What are 3 examples where the Trigger might come up?
4. Visualize yourself doing the Action 3 times.
5. Repeat these questions for each TAP on your TAPs list
(If you for some reason want to print out a hard copy, here is a Google Drive link.)
This is what Active Monitoring might look like as a TAP:
Trigger: "After I ﬁnish eating breakfast..."
→
Action: "Then I will immediately go and ﬁll out my Active Monitoring TAP Worksheet."
Don't worry if you're not going through every question or you're using a diﬀerent
format. While people often tell you not to half-ass things, I think that I'd recommend
consistently doing a poor job rather than sometimes doing in-depth Active Monitoring.
In the studies involving active monitoring, the actual method of monitoring was less
important than the actual monitoring itself.
++++
Systematic Planning 2: TAP Everything
By now, I hope it's clear that the TAP framework is a simple and ﬂexible way to frame
behavioral change. Yet, thinking of new behaviors in this model isn't always our default
mode of thinking. We're often thinking about just what we want to do, rather than the
when, where and how.
Having a structured way to make new habits like the TAP model is good, but you also
need to get into a habit of actually using it. Thus, one way to make this process more
habitual is to have a TAP designed to look for new opportunities to make TAPs.
("So I heard you like TAPs...")
For example, say you're talking to someone who opens up with a very nice
conversation starter:
Initially, you might think, "Oh, that was a pretty cool way to start things, I should try
that next time."

If you're trying to hunt for practicality, though, you might want to think, "Huh, that
phrase was a neat way to start things. Let's make a TAP out of this. Maybe something
like [Next time I meet a nice stranger] → [Say these words]..."
This way, you're turning your desires into actual actionables and habits.
The important thing here isn't to conform exactly to the speciﬁcs TAP model, but to get
in the habit of viewing things in the "if-then" style, which makes it easier for you to
actually execute on the actions you prefer.
A "TAP Everything" meta-TAP might look like this:
Trigger: "When I notice myself thinking, 'I want to do X'..."
→
Action: "Look for a speciﬁc Trigger to do X and turn it into a TAP."
Basically, I'm suggesting you should make a habit out of making habits.
++++
Systematic Planning 3: Murphyjitsu Your TAPs
We touched upon this earlier in the example about how diﬀerent techniques can feed
into one another, and this section just states it a little more clearly.
Murphyjitsu and the related set of planning prompts is very useful, and having them
ﬁre oﬀ when making a TAP can make them more robust and likely to succeed.
Thus, we can also make a TAP for this!
TAPs work best when the Trigger is clear and the Action is explicit, so most of the
common failure modes are because either one or both of the two components are
unclear.
So an example "Murphyjitsu Your TAPs" meta-TAP might look like this:
Trigger: "When I think of both the Trigger and the Action for a TAP..."
→
Action: "I will imagine that it's one week later and I haven't done my TAP at all. What
are the ﬁrst two failures that come to mind? How can I patch my TAP to ﬁx them?"
It's less important that we plan for all failures and more important that we just do this
in the ﬁrst place, like in Active Monitoring. We can get most of the value by just
checking for a few of the most common failure modes.
This is where things get interconnected and fun:
Once you've developed the "TAP Everything"-TAP, you now have a new routine action
which would serve as a very good Trigger for your "Murphyjitsu Your TAPs"-TAP.
The end goal here would be for "TAP Everything"-TAP and "Murphyjitsu Your TAPs"-TAP
to end up becoming chunked together, into one unit. Research in chunking shows that

actions habitually done together can end up forming a cached sequence, where one
action follows another *27.
So there's some hope that we'll eventually be able to "chain" habits together, in larger
structures similar to how habits themselves consist of a context cue and a response.
(Although this is more geared towards motor skills, it at least seems plausible that
mental actions could work in a similar way. )
++++
Scaling Up:
[Scaling Up is one simple way to ﬁght the "intention-action gap", the phenomenon
where our desires and actions don't align. It involves gradually building up an action so
that at every step, it's not too diﬃcult.]
Research:
Scaling Up is a technique intended to bridge the intention-action gap.
The intention-action gap is a term used in the research to point at situations where we
might fail to take action, despite holding the intention to do so *28.
A typical example might be that of someone who wants to exercise more, knows it's
good for them, yet still doesn't ﬁnd themselves doing it. Or, the dieter who'd like to eat
more healthily, is aware of the beneﬁts, but still isn't doing so.
Why is this important when considering habits?
Well, when forming TAPs, we saw earlier that they work best on actions you already
wanted to do. But what about actions you know are good for you, but don't really want
to get done? This is where ﬁnding concrete strategies to bridge the gap are important.
First oﬀ, it seems good to diﬀerentiate between roughly two relevant reasons here that
a habit might not stick:
1. You forget about the action when the opportunity comes.
2. You don't want to do the action when the opportunity comes.

Most of the research on crossing the intention-action gap seems to focus on planning or
implementation intentions as a way to increase the chances of actually acting on
desired behavior *29. This is for the ﬁrst problem, and it's where TAPs and Systematic
Planning work best.
To try and address all of the second problem—the question of "wanting"—would likely
require its own primer. There's a lot of intricacies to breaking apart exactly what it
means to "want" or to "want want" something. Thus, the actual technique for Scaling
Up merely scratches the surface of what could be a much deeper discussion.
As the name suggests, Scaling Up suggests taking an action and gradually building on
it.
++++
Technique:
In short, Scaling Up says if the action you'd like to turn into a habit is undesirable to
you, start small and build up. You initiate with a watered down, doable version of the
activity, and gradually scale up.
The evidence base for this technique comes from a combination of shaping and
exposure therapy †5.
Shaping is, roughly speaking, the idea of gradually rewarding behavior that gets closer
and closer to the target *31. With incremental changes each time, this allows for the

building up of even quite complex behaviors. When applied to habit learning, this
means eventually doing the hard action you felt aversive to in the beginning.
A good example may be something like walking across a balance beam, where you
don't try to go all the way across on your ﬁrst time.
Perhaps you ﬁrst start out by just standing still and balancing. Then you try to take 3
steps with good form before falling. Then maybe 6 steps. And after that maybe halfway
across the entire beam.
The point is that every step of the way, you're working to an intermediate goal which
brings you closer to the ﬁnal step. You're never biting oﬀ more than you can chew.
One of the main lessons here is that expanding your expected timeframe for goal
achievement can make scaling up to the hard thing more bearable.
While this seems to be obvious for things like exercise, I don't think people always
translate this idea into other contexts like studying, which ends up with people doing
things like trying to write an essay the night before.
The other part of the technique draws inspiration from exposure therapy, the process
by which consistently being exposed to aversive phenomenon can decrease the degree
of aversion *32.
Though this is speculative, it at least seems plausible that consistently successfully
doing even an easier version of the hard or aversive action is useful. Doing so could
provide additional experiential evidence that said action is not so bad after all, allowing
your brain to update the negative feelings associated with the target behavior.
If we go back to the balance beam example, walking only a few steps is likely lower
resistance. Then, the next time you go to the balance beam, your locally cached
feelings of "Hey, that wasn't so bad last time!" can help make it a little more palatable
as well.
Taken together, these two parts form the evidence base for scaling up in level as a
potentially viable solution for dealing with trying to habituate aversive behaviors.
(Remember that there's far more depth here, and the following technique merely
scratches the surface.)
As an actual technique, Scaling Up is about ﬁnding ﬁrst a manageable chunk of the
actual target behavior you'd like to habituate and then gradually working towards the
goal.
Step-by-step, it looks like:
1. Quantify the aversive Action you would like to be able to do. 
EX: "Every day, right after taking a shower, I want to write 1000 words."
2. Find a smaller version of the Action you can take without much
resistance. 
EX: "Every day, right after taking a shower, I will write 200 words."
3. Scale up gradually and consistently (For a schedule, weekly is a good
default, but pick what works for you.) 
EX: "Every week I'll add 100 more words to my daily writing goal."

Scaling Up is simple, I know, and it's not always clear exactly what the smaller version
of the Action is. However, I stand by its role as a useful consideration in building habits.
For things like homework, exercise, or coding, ﬁnding ways to get started at all is very
good.
Too often, I think, we wrongfully look at actions and goals as all or nothing, and we get
more easily discouraged when we don't immediately hit 100%. Being able to Scale Up
helps also bridge the gap between our expectations and reality.
++++
NEXT ESSAY

Instrumental Rationality 4.3: Breaking
Habits and Conclusion
[Instrumental Rationality Sequence 4.3/7]
[Part three of a three-part series of habits.]
[We go over three techniques for creating habits: Going Upstream and Substitution.
Then we conclude the mini-sequence on habits]
Techniques: Breaking Habits :
While creating new habits focuses on reinforcing the link between the Trigger and the
Action, breaking habits is about ﬁnding ways to disrupt the typical context cue and
response mechanism.
Thus, the techniques below sorta do the opposite of what the stuﬀ in Creating Habits
did. For example, by weakening the link between the context cue and the response,
we can disable the automaticity. Or, we might substitute it with something more
desirable.
The two techniques we'll go over are Going Upstream and Substitution.
IMAGE: https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*NtngNsQgX035it-
vHTY0Jw.png
++++
Going Upstream:
[Going Upstream is a set of concepts based around removing the context cues of
unwanted habits beforehand so the habit doesn't activate. It's backed by
experimental evidence, and it ﬁts right in with our standard habit model.]
Research:
The idea behind Going Upstream is that one of the best ways to disrupt a habit is to
go straight up to the top.
By that, I mean you're targeting the source of the phenomenon, i.e. whatever's
causing it at the very top of the chain *33. Changes upstream should have eﬀects that
ﬂow through to the bottom. It's like how building a dam upstream of a river causes the
water ﬂowing down to slow to a trickle. Hence the name.
But this is probably still a little abstract. Let's get a bit more speciﬁc:
We know from the standard habit model that habits ﬁre in the presence of certain
context cues. And many of these cues are in the environment.

Thus, one way to remove an unwanted habit through Going Upstream is to limit your
exposure to the aforementioned cue. If you don't encounter the cue, then the habit
won't ﬁre at all.
For example, say you have an unwanted habit of going into a long bout of distracted
browsing after opening your Facebook news feed. One way to make this habit less
prevalent by Going Upstream would be to disable your Facebook news feed, removing
any chance that you'd get distracted in the ﬁrst place.
Going Upstream is functionally very similar to the idea of precommitment, the idea of
cutting oﬀ some of your options ahead of time to make sure you can stick to your
commitments *34.
An example might be if a dieter throws out all the unhealthy snacks in their house.
Then, they replace them all with healthy options. Now, they have no choice but to
snack healthily when hungry.
Or, consider the student who goes to the library to "force" themselves to study
because there's less distractions in the library's study room than at home.
We see that principles based in Going Upstream have eﬀects across varied domains,
from reducing smoking to improving public transportation usage *35.
++++
Technique:
At its core, Going Upstream is about being able to make choices for your decisions
where you have the most control. It's far easier to remove aﬀect your exposure to the
context cue in the ﬁrst place than to override a habit once the context cue kicks in.
Using this principle, we'll go over three sub-techniques which each use the Going
Upstream principle: Trigger Removal, Cue Disruption, and Changing Friction.
++++
Going Upstream 1: Trigger Removal
As we already alluded to earlier, one of the most straightforward applications of Going
Upstream is to simply remove the Trigger that leads to the habit.
The steps of Trigger Removal are:
1. Put your unwanted habit into the TAP framework. 
EX: You want to stop consistently checking your phone for notiﬁcations. You ask
yourself, "What conditions seem to lead to my checking of the phone?" Thinking
back to the last few times you checked your phone, you look at the diﬀerent
parts that make you the habit.
2. Identify the Trigger(s) that seem to lead you towards taking the Action.
EX: You realize that it's like that the "Ping!" sound of notiﬁcations seems to be
the main Trigger. In situations, your phone will ring, and you notice yourself with

the urge to ﬂip your phone to see what happened.
3. Take steps to remove the Trigger from your environment. 
EX: You decide to silence your phone's notiﬁcations, so you aren't prompted to
check it on the audio cue. The end result is that your attention becomes less
diverted by notiﬁcations.
That's the gist of it—ﬁgure out what's cuing your unwanted habit and remove it from
the environment.
++++
Going Upstream 2: Cue Disruption
The more extreme version of Trigger Removal is Cue Disruption, which is based oﬀ the
idea that certain windows of opportunity make it a lot easier to Go Upstream and alter
cues. Speciﬁcally, these opportunities happen when there are major shifts in your
environment, like when you move to a new town.
As evidence, we see that when people move to a new, unfamiliar place, this is a prime
time to form new habits and break old ones because of the absence of many of their
old context cues *36. This seems to be valid for a variety of activities, from taking
public transport to watching less TV *37.
For another example, switching to a new job is also a prime time to try and rid
yourself of certain bad workﬂow habits. Now that you're in a new environment, you're
sorta given a new slate. The old cues which might have had a major hand in leading to
undesirable behaviors are gone, giving you space to try and mindfully create some
better TAPs.
Capitalizing on this break in continuity of context cues forms the core of Cue
Disruption. Because such changes are uncommon, I'd hesitate to really call this a
technique. It's more of just a general consideration to keep in mind if you ﬁnd yourself
changing environments.
And there's really not too much to it:
1. Undergo a change in your environment. 
EX: Move to a new city.
2. Form new TAPs using the new environmental cues. 
EX: Stop eating junk food because you don't know where the unhealthy
restaurants are.
You might not get to use this often, but I mention this because I think it's good to keep
cached in your brain as a viable option when the opportunity does arise.
++++
Going Upstream 3: Changing Friction

As a technique, Trigger Removal clearly doesn't work for all habits. Not all Triggers are
external environmental ones. Other harder-to-target Triggers might involve internal
feelings or emotions. Or, the Triggers might be impractical to remove because they're
not something you have direct control over, like what words other people say.
Especially for situations where you don't have complete control over the Trigger, the
next best thing you can try is just to make it harder for you to access either the
Trigger or the Action.
This is the idea behind Adding Friction.
"Friction" is being used here to mean additional barriers that prevent immediate
access—like how friction in the real world makes smooth sliding more diﬃcult. On the
ﬂip side, Reducing Friction is about having less barriers towards action, so that it's
easier to execute good habits.
An example of Adding Friction would be if you installed a Chrome extension to add a
30 second delay time each time you tried to visit Facebook. This might be preferable
to simply blocking Facebook outright because simply removing the Action of "visit
Facebook" doesn't leave you with an alternative. By adding a delay time, you gain an
additional opportunity to reconsider and check in with yourself to see if you really
need to visit the site.
Part of Adding Friction, then, is also about ﬁnding additional opportunities to inject
more time for reﬂection, so that you can see if the habit is aligned with what you
really want.
An example of Reducing Friction would be if someone wanted to go to the gym every
day, and they asked a good friend to bring gym clothes for them and pick them up.
This makes it easier by removing barriers which, had they been unaddressed, could
have been excuses for not going.
These might have taken the form thoughts like "Oh man...I can't ﬁnd my gym shorts...
guess I won't go exercising today, then...".
(Though this section is mainly about breaking habits, Friction, as you can see, is
applicable to either creating or breaking habits. It just depends on whether you're
adding or removing it.)
When applying the concept of Adding and Reducing Friction to habits, the step-by-step
process looks a little like:
1. Identify the TAP you'd like to aﬀect. 
EX: You have a bad internet browsing habit that eats up a lot of time. Looking
into yourself, you see that the habit roughly looks like [Feel tired and not
engaged] → [Go on a browsing spiral].
2. Look at the Trigger. Find a way to make it easier or harder to encounter.
(This is habit-dependent.) 
EX: You ask yourself, "How can I change the frequency with which I encounter
this Trigger?" You decide to take more frequent breaks while you're on the
computer. This thus reduces the probability of your getting tired and distracted
so the TAP doesn't ﬁre as often.

3. Look at the Action. Find a way to make it easier or harder to take. (Also
habit-dependent.) 
EX: You could also block the actual sites that you commonly go on or use some
web ﬁlters to ensure that your work time online is spent only on the places you
decide beforehand.
Some of the examples for Adding Friction you can think of probably look a lot like the
ones for Trigger Removal, and that's ﬁne. Overlap between the sub-techniques is okay.
The main idea here is just being able to generalize the technique to situations where
you might not be able to entirely remove things by thinking in terms of Friction.
Remember that all of these techniques are suggestions, and all of these techniques
are my attempt to make more sense of out of largely general principles. If a diﬀerent
categorization yields results for you, I would recommend you do that instead.
++++
Substitution:
[Substitution is where you swap out one Action for another one but keep the same
Trigger. In essence, it's concerned with ﬁnding ways to switch out your defaults with
better responses.]
Research:
One problem with trying to break unwanted habits is that merely trying to "not do it"
is largely ineﬀective.
For example, one idea that might appear clever is to create an "anti-TAP" for certain
behaviors. While it sounds good to have a habit of not doing something, you'll end up
with TAPs like, "When I think of french fries, I won't eat them."
Which, as it turns, doesn't work very well *38. Anti-TAPs are ineﬀective because when
you tell yourself to not do X, the focus is still on X. This seems to be potentially due to
ironic process theory, the idea that trying to suppress certain thoughts only brings
them to mind.
It's the same reason why telling someone to not imagine a red horse driving a blue
convertible only makes the absurd image more vivid in their heads. Having a TAP that
tells you what not to do isn't useful when it doesn't concretely provide an alternative.
Otherwise, all that's bouncing around in your head is the very thing you told yourself
not to do.
Thus, the more reasonable thing to do is to ﬁnd ways to re-engineer your existing TAPs
such that you can instead take an improved alternative action. This gives you another
actionable to instead of just leaving you with no way out.
As a technique, Substitution is about trying actually specify what to do instead of just
attempting to suppress the original response after encountering the context cue *39.
This is more reasonable because your focus can be directed on the alternative action
instead of just dwelling on how much you don't want to do something.

Technique:
Substitution in a systematic layout looks like:
1. Identify the TAP you'd like to change, speciﬁcally the Trigger. 
EX: You'd like to drink less soda. You notice that you typically think of getting
sodas after ordering a burger. 
2. Find an alternative Action to replace it with that's more satisfactory. 
EX: You decide to ask for an ice water instead.
3. Do 5 mental run-throughs of the updated TAP and keep track of your
progress with tools from Systematic Planning. 
EX: You do 5 mental run-throughs of ordering water instead of soda.
That's it. Of course the rest of the guidelines from making TAPs still hold, like choosing
concrete actions and writing it down. But the overall concept, like many of the
techniques we've gone over, is quite simple.
Especially for habits with Triggers you don't have complete control over, Substitution
can be a useful intervention to improve your routines †6.
I think that Substitution sorta actually represents the core concept behind behavior
change. When you want to do something diﬀerent (and hopefully better), there's
necessarily some sort of swapping happening.
There's roughly a 3-step process here that looks a little like this:
(Note the actual Substitution algorithm diﬀers a little from the one below, but I claim
the central ideas are very similar.)
1. Notice a behavior. 
EX: "Huh, I just felt jealous when Mary got more attention than me."
2. Reﬂect on the action. 
EX: "Hm, that doesn't seem to be very good. Mary's had it hard the last few
months. What can I do instead?"
3. Swap out the default for something new. 
EX: "Okay, so instead, when someone compliments Mary, I can instead try to
imagine how it feels to be her. I think that'll dissipate some of my envy."
And as we go on to delve into more ideas, this'll be good to keep in mind. Much of
improvement follows this sort of "overriding defaults" idea. You're trying to answer the
question of "How can I make things incrementally better?"
++++
tldr;

We've gone a whirlwind tour of the way that habits operate, from models to
techniques. Here's a short recap of all of the things we've covered.
1. Habits can be basically thought of a combination of a Trigger and a responding
Action.
2. Habits are automatic and keep sticking around, even if you don't want them
to. And rewards don't to much to change them.
3. Habits take somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 months to form.
4. Creating habits consists of explicitly building the Trigger and the Action you
want. The rest of the techniques are ways to reinforce this connection.
5. Breaking habits is about disrupting the chain between the Trigger and the
Action. The rest of the techniques are ways to swap things up or modify the
chain.
++++
Conclusion:
IMAGE: https://cdn-images-
1.medium.com/max/1600/1*Xh0KRH_syx1lAvcoGAr00w.png
There's much more to habits than I've covered here. In the interest of accessibility,
I've made lots of simpliﬁcations, and I've skipped over entire sub-ﬁelds like
conditioning and learning theory.
If you want to read just one "real" paper on the topic for a more academic overview,
I'd strongly recommend Psychology of Habit by Wendy Wood and Dennis Rünger. It's a
fantastic overview of the many facets of habits, and I copied a lot of the same
categories they used in this Habits 101 doc.
But we covered a lot of stuﬀ in this primer.
And building habits is hard.
And there's still the question of "motivation".
(Whatever that is.)
I know getting started might be eﬀortful. Still, I hope that I've given you enough tools
to at least have a structured way of thinking about habits.
When you decide that you want to start tinkering with your own routines, you'll now
have some eﬀective tools to start experimenting with.
++++
Footnotes (†):

†1. While this deﬁnition is what's used by many papers on habits, note that disputes
still exist between what the "best" deﬁnition is. See *3 for an in-depth discussion. In
my opinion, most of the dispute is fairly pedantic, and for practical purposes, the one
given is good enough.
†2. Addiction and habituation aren't exactly the same thing, but my understanding is
that they're quite similar, so I equated the two for ease of understanding. For a deeper
look, you can check out *40.
†3. While I think that the general point here stands, note that ego depletion, one of
the core ideas behind the idea of willpower-as-a-resource is currently on shaky ground.
See *41 for more information.
†4. Although there are some technical diﬀerences between how habits and
implementation intentions operate, I'll be using the two terms interchangeably, as our
focus is on intentionally creating habits, which resolves much of the diﬀerences in
deﬁnition.
†5. As we're smashing two related concepts together without a concrete evidence
base for the actual technique, it's valid to point out that Scaling Up is less well-
established than other things we've gone over.
†6. I do think that there's bound to be some sort of cognitive dissonance when the old
Action and the new Action both try to ﬁre (although I didn't ﬁnd any papers on this
speciﬁcally), which I agree is less than ideal.
However, we do have anecdotal evidence that people can overcome their bad habits,
so I'm less concerned about this being a major problem. But it does seem good to
acknowledge it.
++++
References (*):
1. Wood, Wendy, Jeﬀrey M. Quinn, and Deborah A. Kashy. "Habits in everyday life:
thought, emotion, and action." Journal of personality and social psychology 83.6
(2002): 1281.
http://www-
ccd.usc.edu/assets/sites/545/docs/Wendy_Wood_Research_Articles/Habits/Wood.Quinn
.Kashy.2002_Habits_in_everyday_life.pdf
2. Gardner, Benjamin. "Habit as automaticity, not frequency." European Health
Psychologist 14.2 (2012): 32-36.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/230576965_Habit_as_automaticity_not_freq
uency
3. Gardner, Benjamin. "A review and analysis of the use of 'habit' in understanding,
predicting and inﬂuencing health-related behaviour." Health Psychology Review 9.3
(2015): 277-295.
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17437199.2013.876238

4. Wood, Wendy, and David T. Neal. "A new look at habits and the habit-goal
interface." Psychological review 114.4 (2007): 843.
http://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/545/docs/Wendy_Wood_Research_Articles/Habits/w
ood.neal.2007psychrev_a_new_look_at_habits_and_the_interface_between_habits_and
_goals.pdf
5. Abrahamse, Elger L., et al. "Control of automated behavior: insights from the
discrete sequence production task." Frontiers in human neuroscience 7 (2013).
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3601300/
6. Wood, Wendy, and Dennis Rünger. "Psychology of habit." Annual Review of
Psychology 67 (2016).
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/cfd7/237c53905b7ce622fa967bf2c817fce4f979.pdf
7. Same as 4.
8. Mirenowicz, Jacques, and Wolfram Schultz. "Preferential activation of midbrain
dopamine neurons by appetitive rather than aversive stimuli." Nature 379.6564
(1996): 449.
(Couldn't ﬁnd PDF :'< )
9. Same as 4.
10. Same as 6.
11. Tricomi, Elizabeth, Bernard W. Balleine, and John P. O'Doherty. "A speciﬁc role for
posterior dorsolateral striatum in human habit learning." European Journal of
Neuroscience 29.11 (2009): 2225-2232.
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06796.x/full
12. Kane, Robert L., et al. "A structured review of the eﬀect of economic incentives on
consumers' preventive behavior." American journal of preventive medicine 27.4
(2004): 327-352.
http://www.ajpmonline.org/article/S0749-3797(04)00178-3/fulltext
13. Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor. "Incentives, commitments, and
habit formation in exercise: evidence from a ﬁeld experiment with workers at a
fortune-500 company." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7.3 (2015): 51-
84.
https://www2.vwl.uni-mannheim.de/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/avh-
seminar/Paper_Royer.pdf
14. Hogarth, Lee, et al. "Associative learning mechanisms underpinning the transition
from recreational drug use to addiction." Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
1282.1 (2013): 12-24.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/232925503_Associative_learning_mechanis
ms_underpinning_the_transition_from_recreational_drug_use_to_addiction

15. Dolan, Ray J., and Peter Dayan. "Goals and habits in the brain." Neuron 80.2
(2013): 312-325.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3807793/
16. Neal, David T., Wendy Wood, and Jeﬀrey M. Quinn. "Habits—A repeat
performance." Current Directions in Psychological Science 15.4 (2006): 198-202.
https://www.lescahiersdelinnovation.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/habits-
Neal.Wood_.Quinn_.2006.pdf
17. Wood, Wendy, Leona Tam, and Melissa Guerrero Witt. "Changing circumstances,
disrupting habits." Journal of personality and social psychology 88.6 (2005): 918.
http://128.125.126.117/assets/sites/545/docs/Wendy_Wood_Research_Articles/Habits/
Wood.Tam.GuerreroWitt.2005_Changing_circumstances_disrupting_habits.pdf
18. Ouellette, Judith A., and Wendy Wood. "Habit and intention in everyday life: The
multiple processes by which past behavior predicts future behavior." Psychological
bulletin 124.1 (1998): 54.
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/1877/3d4fa2e3d187f17b387ef56e4fdf6c1e8c15.pdf
19. Neal, David T., Wendy Wood, and Aimee Drolet. "How do people adhere to goals
when willpower is low? The proﬁts (and pitfalls) of strong habits." Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 104.6 (2013): 959.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/237015191_How_Do_People_Adhere_to_Goal
s_When_Willpower_Is_Low_The_Proﬁts_and_Pitfalls_of_Strong_Habits
20. Norman, Donald A. "Categorization of action slips." Psychological review 88.1
(1981): 1.
https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Donald_Norman/publication/202165677_Categori
zation_of_Action_Slips/links/0fcfd5059e89d00d77000000/Categorization-of-Action-
Slips.pdf
21. Kaushal, Navin, and Ryan E. Rhodes. "Exercise habit formation in new gym
members: a longitudinal study." Journal of Behavioral Medicine 38.4 (2015): 652.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/274728787_Exercise_habit_formation_in_ne
w_gym_members_A_longitudinal_study
22. Lally, Phillippa, et al. "How are habits formed: Modelling habit formation in the real
world." European journal of social psychology 40.6 (2010): 998-1009.
http://repositorio.ispa.pt/bitstream/10400.12/3364/1/IJSP_998-1009.pdf
23. Gollwitzer, Peter M., and Paschal Sheeran. "Implementation intentions and goal
achievement: A meta‐analysis of eﬀects and processes." Advances in experimental
social psychology 38 (2006): 69-119.
http://duwtje.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/implementation-intention.pdf
24. Gollwitzer, Peter M., and Veronika Brandstätter. "Implementation intentions and
eﬀective goal pursuit." Journal of Personality and social Psychology 73.1 (1997): 186.

http://www.psych.nyu.edu/gollwitzer/97GollBrand_ImpIntGoalPurs.pdf
25. Judah, Gaby, Benjamin Gardner, and Robert Aunger. "Forming a ﬂossing habit: an
exploratory study of the psychological determinants of habit formation." British journal
of health psychology 18.2 (2013): 338-353.
https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Gaby_Judah/publication/230878389_Forming_a_ﬂ
ossing_habit_An_exploratory_study_of_the_psychological_determinants_of_habit_form
ation/links/0fcfd5060379b99831000000.pdf
26. Hagger, Martin S., and Aleksandra Luszczynska. "Implementation intention and
action planning interventions in health contexts: State of the research and proposals
for the way forward." Applied Psychology: Health and Well‐Being 6.1 (2014): 1-47.
https://espace.curtin.edu.au/bitstream/handle/20.500.11937/32868/199541_199541.p
df?sequence=2&isAllowed=y
27. Same as 5.
28. Sniehotta, Falko F., Urte Scholz, and Ralf Schwarzer. "Bridging the intention-
behaviour gap: Planning, self-eﬃcacy, and action control in the adoption and
maintenance of physical exercise." Psychology & Health 20.2 (2005): 143-160.
https://kops.uni-
konstanz.de/bitstream/handle/123456789/21072/sniehotta_210725.pdf?
sequence=2&isAllowed=y
29. Webb, Thomas L., and Paschal Sheeran. "Does changing behavioral intentions
engender behavior change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence."
Psychological bulletin 132.2 (2006): 249.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/7241257_Does_Changing_Behavioral_Intenti
ons_Engender_Behavior_Change_A_Meta-Analysis_of_the_Experimental_Evidence
30. Sheeran, Paschal, and Thomas L. Webb. "The intention-behavior gap." Social and
Personality Psychology Compass 10.9 (2016): 503-518.
https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Paschal_Sheeran/publication/307857321_The_Int
ention-Behavior_Gap/links/57deb52e08aeea19593b4cee/The-Intention-Behavior-
Gap.pdf
31. Peterson, Gail B. "A day of great illumination: BF Skinner's discovery of shaping."
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 82.3 (2004): 317-328.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1285014/?tool=pmcentrez
32. Clark, David M., et al. "Cognitive therapy versus exposure and applied relaxation
in social phobia: A randomized controlled trial." Journal of consulting and clinical
psychology 74.3 (2006): 568.
https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Jennifer_Wild/publication/6963152_Cognitive_ther
apy_vs_exposure_and_applied_relaxation_in_social_phobia_A_randomized_controlled_t
rial/links/0912f50892b8056fb6000000.pdf
33. Verplanken, Bas, and Wendy Wood. "Interventions to break and create consumer
habits." Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 25.1 (2006): 90-103.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/277501269_Interventions_to_Break_and_Cre
ate_Consumer_Habits
34. Ariely, Dan, and Klaus Wertenbroch. "Procrastination, deadlines, and performance:
Self-control by precommitment." Psychological science 13.3 (2002): 219-224.
http://wolfweb.unr.edu/homepage/pingle/Teaching/BADM%20791/Week%207%20Procr
astination,%20Impatience%20and%20Hyperbolic%20Discounting/arielydeadlines.pdf
35. [Wood, Wendy, and David T. Neal. "Healthy through habit: Interventions for
initiating & maintaining health behavior change." Behavioral Science & Policy 2.1
(2016): 71-83.]
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309191280_Healthy_Through_Habit_Interve
ntions
36. Walker, Ian, Gregory O. Thomas, and Bas Verplanken. "Old habits die hard: Travel
habit formation and decay during an oﬃce relocation." Environment and Behavior
47.10 (2015): 1089-1106.
http://opus.bath.ac.uk/41989/1/Accepted_version.pdf
37. Same as 35.
38. Adriaanse, Marieke A., et al. "Planning what not to eat: Ironic eﬀects of
implementation intentions negating unhealthy habits." Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 37.1 (2011): 69-81.
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0146167210390523?url_ver=Z39.88-
2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%3dpubmed
39. Lally, Phillippa, and Benjamin Gardner. "Promoting habit formation." Health
Psychology Review 7.sup1 (2013): S137-S158.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/230576970_Promoting_habit_formation
40. Everitt, Barry J. "Neural and psychological mechanisms underlying compulsive
drug seeking habits and drug memories-indications for novel treatments of addiction."
European Journal of Neuroscience 40.1 (2014): 2163-2182.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4145664/
41. Hagger, Martin S., and Nikos LD Chatzisarantis. "Commentary: Misguided eﬀort
with elusive implications, and sifting signal from noise with replication science."
Frontiers in psychology 7 (2016).
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00621/full
42. Harkin, Benjamin, et al. "Does monitoring goal progress promote goal attainment?
A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence." (2016): 198.
http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/87431/1/bul%20Harkin%20raw%20FINAL.pdf
++++

Next Essay

Instrumental Rationality 5: Interlude
II
[Instrumental Rationality Sequence 5/7]
[This Interlude once again goes over two additional ideas that are separate from the
well-researched stuﬀ: There Is No Akrasia and Recovering from Failure . The ﬁrst
endorses a reductionist, speciﬁc view towards tackling akrasia, while the second is
about having a policy of self-care when you inevitably fail at your endeavors.]
There Is No Akrasia:
[This essay is about how the term "akrasia" isn't too useful. I argue against using any
sort of general label for the feeling of "anti-wantiness", i.e. when you don't want to do
something. Instead, I push for a reductionist approach to look at the problem.]
"Akrasia" is a term often used to mean "weakness of will", aka the intention-action
gap we covered in Scaling Up in Instrumental Rationality 4.2. It's when you somehow
"want" to do something, yet you still don't actually do it.
I also think it's an idea that incurs potentially major costs when you hold it in your bag
of mental models. I claim that:
1. Akrasia is often treated as a "thing" by people who learn about it, and this can
lead to problems, even though akrasia a sorta-coherent concept. 
2. If we want to move forward and solve the problems that fall under the akrasia-
umbrella, it's better to Taboo the term akrasia altogether and instead employ a
more reductionist approach that favors speciﬁcity
First oﬀ, I do think that akrasia is a term that resonates with a lot of people. When I've
described this concept to friends, they've all had varying degrees of reactions along
the lines of "Aha! This term perfectly encapsulates something I feel!"
It does seem, then, that this concept of "want-want versus want" or "being unable to
do what you 'want' to do" seems to point at a real group of things in the world, at
least from a perception standpoint.
However, I think that this might have inadvertent problems.
Once people learn the term akrasia and what it represents, they can now pattern-
match it to their own associated experiences. I think that, once you've reiﬁed akrasia,
i.e. turned it into a "thing" inside your worldview, problems can occur.
First oﬀ, treating akrasia as a real thing gives it additional weight and power over you:
When you start to notice the patterns, you can start see akrasia everywhere, even in
places where it might not be immediately useful. One example is when people may try
less hard because they suddenly realize they're in the grip of this terrible monster
called Akrasia, which seems so big and scary.

I think this sort of worldview ends up reinforcing some unhelpful attitudes towards
solving the problems akrasia represents. As an example, here are two paraphrased
things I've overheard about akrasia which I think illustrate this.
"Akrasia has mutant healing powers...Thus you can't ﬁght it, you can only keep
switching tactics for a time until they stop working..."
"I have massive akrasia...so if you could just give me some more high-powered tools
to defeat it, that'd be great..."
Both of these quotes seem to have taken the akrasia idea a little too far.
As I'll later argue, "akrasia" seems to be dealt with better when you see the problem
as a collection of more isolated disparate failures of diﬀerent parts of your ability to
get things done, rather than as an umbrella term.
I think that the current akrasia framing actually makes the problem more intractable.
I see potential failure modes where people end up using it as an excuse (perhaps not
an explicit belief, but as an implicit one) that impacts their ability to do work. Akrasia
is one of those things that can feel like an explanation in the same way that genetics
can; it can feel like something that you can't ﬁght against. And part of this feels like it
could be due to a self-fulﬁlling attitude.
Just giving people the ability to recognize the bigger pattern and saying, "Hey, all
these pieces represent a Thing called akrasia that's hard to defeat," could be bad.
Having new things in your world model can harm you.
How can we make the akrasia problem more tractable, then?
I claimed earlier that akrasia does seem to be a real thing, as it seems to be relatable
to many people.
I think this may actually because akrasia maps onto too many things. It's an umbrella
term for lots of diﬀerent problems in motivation and eﬃcacy that could be quite
disparate problems. The typical akrasia framing lumps problems like temporal
discounting with motivation problems like internal disagreements or ugh ﬁelds, and
more.
Those are all very diﬀerent problems with very diﬀerent-looking solutions!.
In the above quotes about akrasia, I think that they're an example of having mixed up
the class with its members. Instead of treating akrasia as an abstraction that uniﬁes a
class of self-imposed problems that share the property of acting as obstacles towards
our goals, we treat it as a problem onto itself.
Saying you want to "solve akrasia" makes about as much sense as directly asking for
ways to "solve cognitive bias". Clearly, cognitive biases are merely a class for a wide
range of errors our brains make in our thinking. The exercises you'd go through to
solve overconﬁdence look very diﬀerent than the ones you might use to solve scope
neglect, for example.
Under this framing, I think we can be less surprised when there is no direct solution to
ﬁghting akrasia—because there isn't one.

I think the solution here is to be speciﬁc about the problem you are currently facing.
Once again, we're back to explication from Act Into Uncertainty from Interlude I.
It's easy to just say you "have akrasia" and feel the smooth comfort of a catch-all
term that doesn't provide much in the way of insight. It's another thing to go deep
into your ugly problem and actually, honestly say what the problem is.
The important thing here is to identify which subset of the huge akrasia-umbrella your
individual problem falls under and try to solve that speciﬁc thing instead of throwing
generalized "anti-akrasia" weapons at it.
Is your problem one of remembering to do the thing? Then perhaps set up a reminder
system. Maybe try out a TAP that works with your routine.
Is your problem one of hyperbolic discounting, i.e. of favoring short-term gains? Then
ﬁgure out a way to recalibrate the way you weigh outcomes. Maybe look into
precommitting to certain courses of action.
Is your problem one of insuﬃcient motivation to pursue things in the ﬁrst place? Then
look into why you care in the ﬁrst place. If it turns out you really don't care, then don't
worry about it. Else, ﬁnd ways to source more motivation.
The basic (and obvious!) technique I propose, then, looks like:
1. Identify the akratic thing. 
2. Figure out what's happening when this thing happens. Break it down
into moving parts and how you're reacting to the situation. 
3. Think of ways to solve those individual parts. 
4. Try solving them. See what happens 
5. Iterate
Potential questions to be asking yourself throughout this process include:
1. What is causing your problem? 
EX: Do you have the desire but just aren't remembering? Are you lacking
motivation? 
2. How does this problem feel? 
EX: What parts of yourself is your current approach doing a good job of
satisfying? Which parts are not being satisﬁed? 
3. Is this really a problem? 
EX: Do you actually want to do better? How realistic would it be to see the
improvements you're expecting? How much better do you think could be doing?
You're basically just applying reductionism to the problem at hand.
Here's an example of how I worked through one instance of this:
<Cue thinking>

"I suﬀer from akrasia.
More speciﬁcally, though, I suﬀer from a problem where I end up not actually having
planned things out in advance.
This leads me to do things like browse the internet without having a concrete plan of
what I'd like to do next. In some ways, this feels good because I actually like having
the novelty of a little unpredictability in life.
However, at the end of the day when I'm looking back at what I've done, I have a lot
of regret over having not taken key opportunities to actually act on my goals.
So it looks like I do care (or meta-care) about the things I do everyday, but, in the
moment, it can be hard to remember."
<End thinking>
Now that I've far more clearly laid out the problem above, it seems easier to see that
the problem I need to deal with is a combination of:
1. Reminding myself the stuﬀ I would like to do (maybe via a schedule or to-do
list).
2. Finding a way to shift my in-the-moment preferences a little more towards the
things I've laid out (perhaps with a break that allows for some meditation).
I think that once you apply a reductionist viewpoint and speciﬁcally say exactly what it
is that is causing your problems, the problem is already half-solved. (Having well-
speciﬁed problems seems to be half the battle.)
A better framing, then, might be one where there is no akrasia.
There's only situations that have yet to be unpacked and understood.
++++
Recovering from Failure:
[Thoughts on how to recover from failing yourself. Assumes your feelings are well-
intentioned and takes a self-care approach to understand exactly why things are
happening.]
I recently broke a commitment I made to myself. Needless to say, this also wasn't the
ﬁrst time. Yet, after I broke my promise to myself, there was a general feeling of
deﬂation as I realized I'd failed myself once more. This feeling was accompanied by a
vicious cycle of a downward spiral of negative emotions.
Here, we'll be endorsing a general policy of being more understanding with yourself
when you inevitably fail, in a way that hopefully bypasses a lot of the snowballing
negativity.
My broken promises most often happens in cases of time-inconsistent preferences,
where the internal weighing of short-term and long-term rewards gets messed up such
that I could want something "now" but also regret it later on.

For example, say that I've decided to avoid playing video games because I know it
leads to unhealthy reward associations in my brain. But some part of me craves the
gaming experience.
So one day, I end up violating my self-imposed injunction and play a bunch of
matches. At the end of this, I may say, "Never again! I made this mistake again, and
I'm terrible for doing so, but I won't do it again!"
And of course I'll probably later on go and do it again.
Clearly, then, there's an important conversation to be had about why I found myself
violating the commitment. Perhaps it'd be good to have an in-depth examination to
which one of my needs are being satisﬁed when I break a promise to myself.
There's also another, thing, though, before all that happens, on a level higher up,
about a conversation to be had about being able to both take failure in stride and
have a philosophy for trying to minimize future "self-failures".
Thus there's two things happening here:
1. Making sure I don't fall into a negative spiral following a self-failure. 
2. Figuring out how to solve time inconsistency problems in the future.
++++
A good start for the ﬁrst thing is ﬁguring out what sort of response pattern would be
most conducive to moving forward. So here's a bit of an emotionally charged mantra-
of-sorts for your System when you do feel yourself sinking into a spiral:
First oﬀ, look at the whole of things. Unless you're consistently breaking
commitments, it will be the case that, more often than not, you're doing the right
thing. You're not trying to have a perfect streak; you're trying to maximize your total
impact, over time. A single failure in this point in time is not a signal to fail with
abandon .
When you're playing the long game, nothing matters except moving forward and
improving your ability to keep doing things.
If anything, failures are to be expected. You should anticipate messing up because it's
ridiculously unlikely you can maintain a perfect streak forever. Still, that's not a reason
to try and less hard.
You can both say, "I was very sure this would happen because base rates said they
would and I can't be extraordinary all the time," and also say, "I am going to take this
in stride and continue improving."
Take the initial sucker punch of negativity, and end the spiral right here. If you have a
well-developed response to failure, there's no reason to let these negative emotions
overwhelm you. The dark feeling of self-loathing is merely a preset function your body
comes with that attempts to put you in a better position. If you have a better response
than your body's default, then bypass your defaults.
Skip to the end of your negative emotion cycle

But also don't lie to yourself. You can't just pretend that your self-failure didn't happen
—something somewhere isn't being fulﬁlled. The truth is important. Look at the stain
and know that you will see many more stains in the future, and this is what it is.
You don't have to accept it, but you do need to acknowledge it.
Humans are inconsistent. You are inconsistent. We don't yet have the ability to make
binding commitments. If we're inconsistent, we can hold commitments and yet break
them. But we can also break commitments and yet strive to do better.
++++
Once you're suitably oriented and strengthened, we move to the question of
rebuilding a broken promise to ourselves. We're looking to see what happened to go
wrong to try and patch 2.
I think a crucial part of starting this process this is knowing when you're lying to
yourself.
Back to the video game example, imagine that I think to myself, "Man, how great
would it be to play a few matches today?" I could then say things like, "Nah, that's not
a good idea, let's study some machine learning instead."
But even as I list out those alternatives, I can feel myself already drawn to the video
game idea.
Then what actually happens is that I realize I had absolutely no intention to study
machine learning in the ﬁrst place. I already knew that I was going to play some video
games, and the other alternatives were generated halfheartedly.
That's what I mean by lying to yourself.
By the time you violate your own commitments, the internal shift to violate
them has already happened somewhere earlier along the line.
You've already made your decision to break the promise.
Any number of metacognitive safeguards might ﬂare up—like that nagging voice that
asks, "Hey, but didn't we just agree not to fall for temptation last time?"—but they'll
be useless.
In eﬀect, what's happening is that you're already determining the bottom line. If you
already made your decision internally, then any attempt to ﬁgure out "alternatives" is
just paying mere lip service to the idea that you "have yet to make up your mind".
One important skill, then, is being able to examine where this shift happens.
If you can notice the trigger where you make the true, internal decision (and begin to
lie to yourself, pretending that you are still neutral), then you've identiﬁed a key step
to intervene.
This is in line with the bigger idea of ﬁguring out why you broke your own
commitment, as I mentioned earlier. This means probing into your own thoughts and
being honest with yourself.
Questions to ask yourself, then, might be with regards to:

Prior to the breaking:
1. What physical and mental states lead to my thinking about the commitment in
general?
2. Under what circumstances do I feel such a compulsion to violate my commitments?
Moments before breaking:
1. What are the direct thoughts that lead to my breaking?
2. Are there any stories / narratives I tell myself when I consider breaking?
The actual breaking:
1. What parts of me are being fulﬁlled when I do break a commitment?
2. What feels good about breaking the commitment?
3. What might my desire to break such a commitment mean about what I want /
need?
After the above, you want to ask questions with regards to:
Solving things:
1. What goes right when I manage to think about breaking a commitment and yet
don't?
2. What other actions could satisfy myself in the same way that breaking my
commitment does?
As an example, here are some of my answers to some of the above questions:
<Cue thinking>
Q) Under what circumstances do I feel such a compulsion to violate my commitments?
A) Often, it's when I just ﬁnished something large, and I feel like celebrating / relaxing.
There's a rush of happiness, something like, "Yay! We just did something Hard! Now
we deserve a break!"
Otherwise, it's when I feel bored / have nothing to do. Then, it slowly pops into my
mind as an option. And at other times, it's when I feel tired and want something that's
not very demanding.
Q) Are there any stories / narratives I tell myself when I consider breaking?
A) Yes. I'll often tell myself that I won't break the commitment all the way. Or, I'll focus
on how tempting it feels to fail with abandon (there, I said it! failing with abandon is a
seductive option!) and part of my brain uses the strong emotional aﬀect associated
with the fantasy to overpower the other sides.

Q) What might my desire to break such a commitment mean about what I want /
need?
A) I want a way to relax sometimes. It's also about ﬁnding good breaks, of course, but
part of this is that sometimes I really do want to have some good ways of relaxing...
but maybe that says something about what sort of person I am? Maybe I want to work
on changing how I see breaks?
<End thinking>
Once you've got a feel for which things are aﬀecting your decision to break the
commitment to yourself, you can make a plan of attack on making a more robust self-
commitment system.
++++
Two skills that I've found to work well after having gone through the above are that of
Generating Good Alternatives and Metacognitive Aﬀordances.
Generating Good Alternatives:
If you feel the temptation to break a commitment and then pay lip service to
generating other choices, you're obviously lying to yourself—you've already
determined the bottom line without doing any real reasoning.
But now that you've got a more clear understanding of yourself in relation to your
desires and commitments, you can hopefully start to actually take diﬀerent choices.
By taking a more judgment-free attitude to your actions, when faced with the impetus
to break your commitment, you can respond by actually suspending a decision for the
time being. You can look to see what needs your body has and how diﬀerent actions
can satisfy them.
The skill of Generating Good Alternatives is to use this improved self-knowledge to
fuel an improved search through the space of possible actions you can take. You do
this such that you can actually ﬁnd novel actions that both satisfy your hidden need
and don't compromise your values and commitments.
As an example, instead of seeing a desire to play video games as something about
your inherent preferences, you can see it as your body trying to cash out some sort of
need.
My internal dialogue might look like, "Hey, I notice I want to play video games. I
wonder that this is a symptom of? I recall that I often feel like this when I need to take
some time to just cool oﬀ..."
From there, I can try to feel out diﬀerent actions which might also satisfy the need in a
better way.
++++
Metacognitive Aﬀordances:

Your metacognition is that awareness you have inside your head that reacts to your
thoughts. It's the part of your brain about your brain.
Often, my metacognitive safeguards, as I wrote above, will not work. They will ﬂare
and sound the alarm saying, "Alert! You are doing a Bad Thing! This will not pan well
for your mind!".
Of course, I don't really listen that much to it.
Something that has helped me here is having the knowledge that following my
metacognition is available to me. There's some sort of weird self-fulﬁlling prophecy
happening here where if I know that my metacognition will work, this leads me to
expect that it will, such that when it actually ﬁres, I'll actually ﬁnd it useful.
It's sort of like a meta-metacognitive awareness. I know that paying attention to my
thoughts should work. Thus, then my internal safeguards now ﬂare up, I feel the
wordless impulse and think "Ah, yes! This thing! It works and is useful!"
You want to think of your metacognition as more of a lever that is available to you. It's
about making metacognition more of an aﬀordance.
++++
With regards to self-promises, I don't think this resolve everything. I myself still have
trouble; this isn't a cure-all. But I do think that it's an important key part of self-care
and moving forward. The shift and reorientation feels like a key step, and I hope the
ritual, question, and techniques help with the overall process.
Next Essay

Instrumental Rationality 6: Attractor
Theory
[Instrumental Rationality Sequence 6/7]
[Attractor Theory is a hybrid model that tries to reconcile the eﬀects of internal and
external factors of motivation. It makes the claim that an important additional
consideration in decision-making is how the action aﬀects your ability to take future
actions.]
The Model:
Attractor Theory is a qualitative model that's aimed at changing your intuitions about
yourself and decision-making. That means it explains the how but not the why. As a
brief summary, Attractor Theory basically states that you should consider any action
you take as having meta-level eﬀects on changing your local preferences for which
actions feel desirable.
That is to say, taking actions changes which actions you'll take, later down the road.
I'll ﬁrst introduce the three parts of the model, then I'll go over the implications of the
model.
1) First, there's You. Imagine that you're in a clear hamster ball:
IMAGE: https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/0*gEu9UeKBdLyDBtQo.
As a human inside this ball, you can kinda roll around by exerting energy. But it's hard
to do so all of the time — you'd likely get tired. Still, if you really wanted to, you could
push the ball and move.
We'll explore this later, but you can basically think of the energy you have left for
rolling as a proxy for willpower.
2) Second, there are these Utilons, which just represent stuﬀ you want.
IMAGE: https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/0*HUqxllO2S_BiZkEv.
They represent productivity hours, lives saved, HPMOR fan-ﬁctions written, or
anything else you care about getting a lot of. As a human in a hamster ball, you are
trying to roll around and collect as many Utilons as possible.
3) Third, there are all these Attractors that pull you in.
IMAGE: https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/0*vandHod3cgtgnGZb.

And, uh, technically, anything could be an Attractor. But that clearly isn't useful. A
more concrete framing is to think of Attractors as actions or situations. For example,
reading a book, going on vacation, and doing some pushups are all examples of
Attractors.
The bottom line is that something is classiﬁed as an Attractor if it changes how you
currently feel.
(I know this is still pretty vague, but there are some more examples later, so you
might want to just black-box it for now.)
Attractors are like valleys or magnets. The point is that there's a potential diﬀerence,
which causes them to pull you, in your little hamster ball, towards them.
++++
Details:
That's the gist of this model. It also has two major components:
1. Attractors Can Change:
IMAGE: https://cdn-images-
1.medium.com/max/1600/1*swdNdqeWG0WjhmQDLbOUxg.png
Attractors aﬀect one another.
Once you're being pulled in by one, this actually modiﬁes other Attractors. This
usually manifests by changing how strongly other ones are pulling you in. Sometimes,
though, this even means that some Attractors will disappear, and new ones may
appear.
This basically means that taking actions can aﬀect how you feel about other actions.
For example, the set of things that feel desirable to me after running a marathon (EX:
drinking water) may diﬀer greatly from the set of things after I read a book on
governmental corruption (EX: starting a socialist revolution).
Upon reﬂection, this seems fairly obvious. Humans aren't closed systems—our
preferences are always changing with our internal and external states.
Transfer is always happening. Think about how we react when someone says
something nasty or as the weather changes. Our emotions leak into our actions in the
real world, and real world events aﬀect our emotions.
My point here is that, from a perception-based point-of-view, it feels like our actions
change the sorts of things we might want.
Every time we take an action, then, this will, in turn, prime how we view other actions,
often in predictable ways. Though we might not know exactly how they'll change, we
can get good, rough ideas from past experience and our imaginations.

We'll be capitalizing on this interaction later on when we start exploring further
consequences of the Attractor Theory model.
2. Direct Path ≠ Optimal Path
IMAGE: https://cdn-images-
1.medium.com/max/1600/1*kRpwNx8NvlzTj0sjC4VJ9Q.png
As a human, your goal is to navigate this tangle of Utilons and Attractors from your
hamster ball, trying to collect Utilons.
Now you could just try to take a direct path to all the nearest Utilons. However, that
would also mean exerting a lot of energy to ﬁght the pull of Attractors that pull you in
Utilon-sparse directions.
Instead, given that you can't avoid Attractors (they're everywhere in the
environment!), the best thing to do is to be strategic:
What I mean by that is you want to think about how "launch" yourself around in the
environment. Attractors might pull you in, but you still have some limited control when
it comes to choosing which ones to dive into and which ones to pop out of.
You want to choose which Attractors you're drawn to and selectively choose when to
exert energy to move from one to another to maximize your overall trajectory (more
on the energy exertion next section).
The Global Optimization view is also a lot more forgiving to taking breaks. Once you
take the view that long-term maximization is the goal, you're less likely to beat
yourself up for taking rests.
This is because, in many cases, the break isn't cutting time away from your "potential
work time", but it's actually essential to maintaining your ability to even do work in
the ﬁrst place.
For example, taking short breaks is a key component of the Pomodoro Method that
ensures you don't burn out. Likewise, taking periodic walks or other activities which
give you time for your attention to wander often allow your mind to do deeper
thinking.
And of course sleeping is fairly necessary for optimal functionality.
++++
Properties:
Attractor Theory as a model contains several useful concepts: Meta-Eﬀects,
Auxiliary Actions, Starting / Stopping Costs, and Precommitment.
Meta-Eﬀects:
When most people consider actions, I claim that they consider basically two things:

1. The cost of the action. 
EX: "How many hours will it take to drive to Los Angeles?"
2. The eﬀects of the action. 
EX: "What are the beneﬁts of going to Los Angeles?"
If you're smart, you might also consider the tradeoﬀs and opportunity costs, by
comparing the action to other choices.
With Attractor Theory, I think you also now consider a third very important property of
the actions available to you:
3. The eﬀects of the action on you. 
EX: "How will going to Los Angeles change the set of actions that feel yummy to me?"
It's obvious, for sure, but I think that most people's defaults either only have this as
an implicit consideration. Otherwise, they actually just don't really think it about it all.
++++
Auxiliary Actions:
Attractor Theory really shines when you start seeing your actions in terms of, not just
their direct eﬀects, but also their eﬀects on how you can take further actions. It
changes your decision algorithm to be something like:
"Choose actions such that their meta-level eﬀects on me by my taking them allow me
to take more actions of this type in the future and maximize the number of Utilons I
can earn in the long run."
By phrasing it this way, it makes it more clear that most things in life are a longer-
term endeavor that involve trying to globally optimize, rather than locally.
(While it's arguable that a naive view of maximization should by default take this into
account from a consequentialist lens, I think making it explicitly clear, as the above
formulation does, is a useful distinction.)
This allows us to better evaluate actions which, by themselves, might not be too
useful, but do a good job of reorienting ourselves into a better state of mind.
I think it ends up creating the class of auxiliary actions, actions which are easy to do
and also make it easier to take other actions. You can sort of think of them as stepping
stones, which bridge the state between where you are and where you want to end up.
For example, spending a few minutes outside to get some air might not be directly
useful, but it'll likely help clear my mind, which has good beneﬁts down the line, in
how I'm able to do work in the immediate future.
Other potential auxiliary actions for you might include drinking water, stretching,
doodling, meditating, or going for a short walk.
++++
Starting / Stopping Costs:

Attractor Theory also does a good job of modeling how actions seem much harder to
start than to stop. Moving from one Attractor to a disparate one can be costly in terms
of energy, as you need to move against the pull of the current Attractor.
Once you're pulled in, though, it's usually easier to keep going with the ﬂow. So using
this model ascribes costs to starting, and it places a lower cost on continuing actions.
By "pulled in", I mean making it feel eﬀortless or desirable to continue with the action.
(I'm thinking of the feeling you get when you have a decent album playing music, and
you feel sort of tempted to switch it to a better album, except that, given that this
good song is already playing, you don't really feel like switching. Or something like
that.)
This is where willpower comes in. Remember that rolling takes energy, and you
probably only have a ﬁnite amount of it. Thus, you want to pick and choose when you
apply willpower.
The Attractor Theory model suggests that the best opportunities to try "extra hard"
are the ones where you predict that things will be smooth sailing once you're pulled
into the Attractor.
For example, if getting started on reading a book is diﬃcult, but you know that you'll
likely ﬁnd yourself engrossed in the book conditional on your starting, then this is a
good place to put in willpower.
Keeping this in mind allows you to strategically go "against the current" in the
situations where it'll have the greatest beneﬁt on the immediate Future You's ability to
do continued work.
++++
Precommitment:
Attractor Theory views all actions and situations as self-reinforcing slippery slopes.
As such, it more realistically models the act of taking certain actions as leading you to
other Attractors, so you're not just looking at things in isolation.
This view allows you to better see certain "traps", where an action will lead you
deeper and deeper down an addiction/reward cycle, like a huge bag of chips or a
webcomic.
These are situations where, after the initial buy-in, it becomes incredibly attractive to
continue down the same path, as these actions make reinforce themselves, making it
easy to continue on and on...
In this model, we can reasonably predict, for example, that any video on YouTube will
likely lead to more videos because the "sucked-in-craving-more-videos Future You" will
have diﬀerent preferences than "needing-some-sort-of-break Present You".
Our model better reveals how things like YouTube are being deceptive by tricking your
brain with the promise of a small action ("I'll watch just one video...").
The reality is that watching YouTube is a monstrously large Attractor.

("It's so f***ing big!")
The vast variety of suggested videos coupled with the inertia associated with
switching actions means that it's never actually just that one video. Once you're down
the rabbit hole, you just keep on going.
Under Attractor Theory, you'd want to avoid situations which you could lead you down
dangerous spirals, even when the initial actions themselves may not be that
distracting because the model more accurately penalizes this type of snowballing.
++++
Summary:
Attractor Theory tries to explain how we're not always directly in control. Our actions
appear to aﬀect how we take other actions. Still, we do have willpower, and it's best
to try and strategically use energy when considering which decisions to make.
Next Essay

Instrumental Rationality 7: Closing
Disclaimer
[Instrumental Rationality Sequence 7/7]
[A disclaimer that instrumental rationality as presented in this sequence is
incomplete. Your feelings are also important! Pay attention to them.]
After reading through this sequence, you might be feeling very excited to go out and
try some of this stuﬀ out. You might think about imposing this instrumental rationality
stuﬀ upon many areas of your life.
And for that, I have a major cautionary warning.
Rationality can be dangerous because it's an ontology. And while it's not the One
Ontology to Rule Them All, it can often feel like that when you're within the rationality
framing.
Here's an analogy:
Owen is a person who wants to get work done, but often ﬁnds himself playing video
games. He also feels bad about doing so because it doesn't ﬁt in with his self-image.
Maybe there's also something here about society has shaped his values, but the
actual root cause isn't that important. The main point is that some part of him likes
playing the games.
So he's following his intuitive feelings, but also there's guilt somewhere in the system.
Now let's say he bumps into instrumental rationality—planning, habits, motivation—
the whole package.
What I've presented in this sequence is a way of looking at things, kind of like a set of
special glasses.
Once Owen puts on these glasses, he starts to see new opportunities to use his shiny
new techniques, like TAPs, to try and remove his video-game-playing habit. But note
that the very idea of techniques, of transforming concepts into concrete actionables,
is only something he sees when he puts on his Rationality Glasses.
My worry is when people use rationality as the lens through which they view the world
for so long that they forget that there's something important that's hidden underneath
the Rationality Glasses layer. Owen might just end up thinking that the Rationality
Glasses show how the world is, rather than merely a useful way of looking at the
world.
And instrumental rationality, or at least the way that I've presented it here, will have
its own ideological biases. This isn't necessarily bad; it's a necessary consequence of
any way of looking at the world. There'll always be implicit values for any system you
choose to use.
For rationality, these values are about highly striving for things like Optimization and
Self-Improvement. I worry that this implicit valuation can be taken in a very wrong

way. I see a failure mode where everything that doesn't directly contribute to
Optimization is seen as a "bad" thing which needs to be removed.
Owen might then see his video-game-habit as something foreign and "bad" rather
than a poorly understood part of himself. So when Owen tries to use rationality to
forcibly remove those "disobedient" parts of system, I think something quite terrible is
very happening because he's smothering vital parts of himself.
Just because those parts of yourself conﬂict with your "stated" values doesn't mean
they're wrong. It's important to recognize that many apparently "bad" parts of
yourself also have good intentions.
After all, these were parts of himself that Owen had listened to prior to encountering
rationality. They might be hidden under the current framing, but they're still
important.
It's a little like if I just handed you an instruction manual for the human mind, but with
a bunch of the pages missing.
There's a lot that you'd now know about how things in the mind work, but if you just
follow those directions, you wouldn't get the whole story. There will be functions and
knobs that'll also be important which you wouldn't know about. If you only follow the
manual and don't trust your own sense of what else is critical, then you're in trouble.
Sooner or later, something will break, and troubleshooting will be very, very diﬃcult.
This is why I think it's important to respect those "useless" (from the Rationality
Glasses POV) parts of yourself. Just because you can't see a part's function doesn't
imply there isn't one.
The best solution, as far as I can tell, is something like being able to take oﬀ the
Rationality Glasses to get in touch with those gut, instinctual, and quiet parts of
yourself. You need to be able to step away from the rationality virtues of Optimization
and just accept all the parts of yourself.
When you stop trying to cut oﬀ or suppress diﬀerent parts of yourself, something very
diﬀerent happens.
You get a shift where you...Just Do Things.
Motivation and willpower, for example, end up just seeming like largely incoherent
words. You'll have diﬀerent tastes, but suddenly the question of "How can I force
myself to do/not-do X?" just becomes irrelevant.
When you start integrating those quiet parts of yourself, you're somehow more in-
control, even thought you're incorporating more dissent. I know it sounds sily on the
surface. But there's something very good that's happening here, I think, when you
allow all parts of yourself to be fulﬁlled.
This, of course, is a critique of instrumental rationality as I've presented it throughout
this sequence. Others have taken the ﬁeld farther.
A more sophisticated theory of instrumental rationality, like some of CFAR's
curriculum, might be more about communication, focusing on ways to integrate and
dialogue between the explicit parts of yourself (which the Rationality Glasses endorse)

and the implicit parts of yourself (which might not be endorsed, but are important
nonetheless).
++++
So, as you venture forth to try out things, just remember that the set of glasses you've
got is incomplete.
And sometimes, you can see even more clearly without them.

Instrumental Rationality: Postmortem
[In April, I set oﬀ to write a series of essays about instrumental rationality. Now that
the project's reached a pretty good stopping point, I'm looking back to see how my
expectations and goals played out.]
Initial Goals:
[What I originally wanted the book to be like. My estimates vs reality]
Originally, I wanted to write something that would tie together all the current research
on topics like motivation, planning, and habits. I felt like lots of LessWrong posts
touched upon certain areas, like hyperbolic discounting, but there wasn't a central
place where it all came together.
I wanted a new central beacon to point people to when The Sequences didn't quite ﬁt.
I'd envisioned a sequence of essays which would give an overview of the latest
developments in the ﬁeld followed by concrete techniques, ala CFAR.
Here are some of the topics I'd originally wanted to cover:
1. Willpower
2. Attention
3. Habits
4. Behavioral Economics
5. Motivation
When I began this project, I had Planning 101 under my belt, which had taken me
about 20 hours to complete. As far as base rates went, it seemed reasonable to think
that the other topics would take a similar amount of time.
Looking back, it feels a little silly to think that Past Owen thought he could take on ﬁve
more of those 20+ hour chunk projects. That would have easily been 100+ hours, in
addition to editing, compiling, and a bunch of additional grunt work which snuck up on
me.
(What was I thinking?)
In the end, I only managed to write one more primer—Habits 101—which ended up
taking about twice as long, 40 hours, for just the actual writing portion. Reading up on
the articles took up additional time, probably another 10 hours or more.
Though I didn't complete my initial vision, I actually did fairly well on my own
estimates:
I'd given myself an internal completion date of the beginning of September, and I
actually ﬁnished around that time. (Hooray!)

I'd also estimated that I'd write about 10,000 words of new content for the book. And I
went about 50% more than that, writing about 15,000 words of actual new content.
(Hooray!)
(Although the counterfactual for the new content prediction isn't as good as it seems
because I probably would have written some of those blog posts regardless of whether
or not I also held the intention to make a sequence.)
The Finished Result:
[Evaluating the end product, some things which didn't make the ﬁnal cut.]
So I ended up both ﬁnishing both on-target and on-time. How did the actual end
product compare with my expectations?
Well, I've already pointed out how there was a lot of content I wanted to write which
didn't make it into the book. As for the content that did, here are the 9 sections that
made it into the book:
1. Introduction
2. WTF Is Rationality?
3. Starting Advice
4. Planning 101
5. Interlude 1
6. Habits 101
7. Interlude 2
8. Attractor Theory
9. Closing Disclaimer
Of the 9 sections, I think that WTF Is Rationality?, Starting Advice, and Attractor
Theory come closest to the sort of "crystallization" I'd originally hoped for.
In the time between the original blog posts and the polished book essays, I'd had time
to try explaining them to people in person. I think the experience helped me
understand which things were important to focus on and what background knowledge
I needed to assume. The revision and slow iteration of ideas helped me ﬁgure out
which components were the important ones to stress.
So I think those three sections turned out the best.
As for the two 101 primers, I think they were too bulky, and I think a better choice
would have been to sacriﬁce depth for breadth. That is to say, cutting the length of
Habits 101 in half (or even two-thirds) in order to make way for a short primer on both
Attention and Behavioral Economics would have likely been good.
Otherwise, I think it feels a bit jarring to switch from a short heuristic-y essays about
ways to approach life to a deep academic dive into psychology.

As the sequence currently stands, I think it's unbalanced in terms of the topics it goes
over. Partially due to the length of the two 101 primers, I think there's an
overemphasis on planning and habits.
Overall, I think it pushes the "master yourself" mindset over the "become one with
yourself" mindset too hard, which I ended up writing about in the Closing Disclaimer.
Perhaps unfortunately, I'm also fairly conﬁdent that most people who read it won't get
much beneﬁt out of it. (More on this in Evaluating Impact.)
Starting out, I also had some big hopes for the actual format of the book.
I think that most writing doesn't do a good job of helping the reader chunk the
information. That is to say, the information trying to be conveyed is often much
clearer in the author's mind than in the readers'. I claim this is often because the
author has their own way of mentally structuring the information which they neglect
to share during the actual writing.
Frustrated with this, I'd originally wanted to include several design features for the
sequence to help with understanding:
Suggested Exercises at the end of every chapter, focused on developing
practical skills.
Unique formatting, perhaps a diﬀerent font color, for paragraphs which
contained examples (to visually diﬀerentiate them from the rest of the text).
Visual outlines of how points connected in each essay. (You can see some simple
prototype attempts in Habits 101.)
In the end, the only one that made it to the ﬁnal book are the bracketed summaries in
italics that precede each section.
I think that conveying ideas in general is actually rather quite diﬃcult. Cooperation is
required on both the part of the author and the reader, and even an engaging writing
style (or cool design tricks) can only do so much.
Writing Time:
[Reﬂections on the actual writing process.]
I ended up having less time to write the entire book than I originally thought.
No surprise there.
("You don't plan for disaster. Disaster plans for you.")
Part of the reason was because I was physically unavailable on account of my being at
Google doing CS things for three weeks.
The other part was that I found myself mentally incapable of writing quality content
for long bouts of time.

The roughly 100 hours I put into writing this book was scattered over about 4 months.
That ends up being less than an hour a day, though the distribution of hours wasn't
uniform. When it came to writing this book, I found that certain times yielded far more
productivity than others.
Also, looking back, it feels like the entire duration of time was necessary, even if most
of it wasn't actually spent writing. It feels like I just needed time in between writing
sessions to let my mind do its thing under the hood, subconsciously. I'd write for about
an hour, wander about the room (or do something else for an hour), and then I'd
return to writing.
This seems like a speciﬁc instance of the general principle that breaks aren't just a
"fun" activity, but are actually a requisite for good work to happen.
So it was less about getting enough free time in a chunk, but more about getting
enough of the right kinds of time, or something like that. For context, I think that one
thing people overlook when considering making tradeoﬀs involving time is the nature
of the time they're gaining or losing.
For example, if you're able to save ten minutes oﬀ your commute, that roughly
translates to having ten additional minutes to spend at work, which might not be
worth much. In contrast, if you're able to extend your lunch break by twenty minutes,
that could be enough time for a noontime nap, which might be very valuable.
Against the Incentive Gradient
[Writing longform has certain drawbacks.]
When I was working on this project, a friend pushed me to consider writing for a larger
group like BuzzFeed or ClearerThinking. They argued that even though the type of
content engagement I'd get from readers would be less, the net increase in audience
size would mean that the aggregate impact would overall be larger.
The argument seemed good, but I ended up sticking to my original plan to write in
longform.
(Longer exploration on this topic in The Best Self-Help Should Be Self-Defeating.)
Final Lessons:
[What were my concrete takeaways?]
There were several things I learned as a result of undertaking this project:
1. My internal estimates for my task completion time and writing rate are fairly
well-calibrated.
2. I can make graphics of a quality I'm happy with at a rate of about 1 graphic an
hour.
3. Experience and understanding of what research looks like. (EX: Filtering through
papers to ﬁnd promising things, writing summaries, simplifying at the right level,
etc.)

4. Getting constant feedback is both important for my ability to continue projects,
as well as improve the quality. I didn't get enough of it this time around.
5. I had, overall, still underestimated the diﬃculty involved in writing and editing a
book-style project.
The biggest one, though, was the burning question I had when setting out on this
project: "Why the hell hasn't anyone tried to make this type of freely available
rationality handbook before?"
The answer, I think, looks something like this:
If you're writing self-help content, the question of who the audience is inevitable. After
all, at some point, someone's supposed to be reading the content. And in my current
understanding of people, it seems like there's roughly two categories of readers (gross
oversimpliﬁcation alert!):
One, if you're already smart and self-suﬃcient, then you're already combing all the
coolest blogs and books for insight. You're a hyper-scholar who has either read and
gotten value out of what I have to oﬀer, or you've already got even more
sophisticated models.
Two, if you're the sort of insight junkie who's looking for the next 5 minute article on
how to restructure your workﬂow, then you may miss out on the actual good stuﬀ. If
you're always only looking at the small insights, then the ontological lens of rationality
(which is what I really want to illustrate), is largely lost.
So I guess one strong reason for why the sort of rationality handbook I was envisioning
hasn't happened is because it doesn't really help out either of the groups.
The target audience is someone who's a little mixed up in their stages of intellectual
development.
I'm reminded of how I felt after talking about the book Gödel, Escher, Bach with some
friends studying computer science. It's a book which I very much enjoyed. However,
none of them had been impressed with it, and they found it largely pedantic, taking
too long to get to some basic insights.
Most people who read GEB, I suspect, either get lost in the dizzying array of cultural
references and come out with a messy interpretation, or are already with maths and
computer science such that the key points fall ﬂat.
When I read it, I was in this weird spot where I didn't know any computer science, but I
also looked past the references, and I found something exciting that encouraged me
to dive deeper.
++++
With this instrumental rationality sequence, I'd wanted to write something for other
people to beneﬁt from. In a funny sort of way, though, I guess I really did just end up
writing a book for myself.

