
Intro to Naturalism
1. Intro to Naturalism: Orientation
2. Knowing
3. The Territory
4. Interlude: On Realness
5. Observation
6. Direct Observation
7. Patient Observation
8. Naturalism

Intro to Naturalism: Orientation
A note on how to approach this sequence:
If you were exactly like me, I would ask you to savor this sequence, not scarf it. I would ask
you to approach each of these essays in an expansive, lingering, thoughtful sort of mood. I
would ask you to read them a little bit at a time, perhaps from a comfortable chair with a
warm drink beside you, and to take breaks to make dinner, sing in the car, talk to your
friends, and sleep.
These essays are reﬂections on the central principles I have gradually excavated from my
past ten years of intellectual labor. I am a very slow thinker myself; if you move too quickly, I
expect we'll miss each other completely.
There's a certain kind of thing that happens when a person moves quickly, and relies a lot on
their built-up structures—their familiar, tried-and-true habits of thought and perception.
There is a diﬀerent kind of thing that happens when a person can step back and bring those
very structures into view, rather than standing atop them. I'm hoping for the latter. 
But since you're not exactly like me, there might be a better way to approach this sequence,
in your particular case, than the exact one I'd suggest to myself. I hope you'll take a moment
to check.
What matters to me is not how fast you read, or how many sittings it takes; what matters is
that you create for yourself enough space to explore, to observe the real world beyond all
these words, to watch how your own thoughts and experiences unfold in dialog with mine.
Any method that allows you to maintain that kind of space as you read is perfect, as far as
I'm concerned.
"Naturalism" is a label for a conceptual framework, investigatory discipline, and semi-
formalized way of looking at and learning about the world. I've been developing and
teaching naturalism for the past couple of years, if you start counting on the day I chose the
term, or since 2013, if you take a more historical perspective. I've made some relevant
content available, but I've had trouble writing a straightforward introductory post.
The reason for this, as far as I can tell, is that the naturalist perspective is suspicious of
categories, projections, and preconceptions, and seeks to move closer toward (relatively)
unﬁltered, direct observations. It's speciﬁcally a frame-breaking and frame-escaping
discipline, so it's hard to describe in frame-terms without being importantly misleading.
I ardently desire not to mislead anyone.
There's a saying I like a lot, which goes: "A man with one watch knows what time it is; a man
with two is never sure."
(When I ﬁrst heard this, I needed to pause for a moment, to let it sink in. It helped me to
actually visualize wearing a watch on each wrist, then checking the time.)
The reason I like this saying is that it reminds me to be confused, in an appropriate fashion.
"Confused" might even be too weak of a word—it's almost like it reminds me to be scared, in
an appropriate fashion.
I mean, sure—for most things, I don't have to know what time it actually is, with suﬃcient
precision that the oﬀ-ness of my watch makes a meaningful diﬀerence. The claim here is not
that absolute clarity is required at all times.

But there is indeed an unfortunate property of having-a-watch, which is that it provides me
with an answer to the question "what time is it?"
It provides that answer clearly, and speciﬁcally, and unambiguously. It provides that answer
with more conﬁdence than it ought to, like a calculation that doesn't attend to signiﬁcant
digits. And if I'm not careful, then with my watch right in front of me, it's very easy to lose
track of the fact that I do not, in fact, know exactly what time it is. To forget that what I really
know is what time it almost is.
This is what our concepts do for us. They are usually a strict upgrade over "entirely too much
information for us to even begin to process or handle"; but if you lean on them too heavily,
or too unthinkingly, they become actively misleading. Actively harmful, in cases where
precision and accuracy genuinely matter, and being subtly wrong is disastrous.
And concepts encourage us to lean. They're sturdy! Sensible! Comforting! They soothe
confusion, make the world seem more predictable and comprehensible, give us the surface
sensation of control (or at least understanding). It's nice to have answers.
But the map is not the territory.
It's easy to look up at the sky, and name the constellations, without losing track of your
knowledge that there isn't really a Great Bear up there. We know that the constellations
aren't "real," that they're just there to help us chunk and cluster and orient and discuss.
 

But constellations are an unusually transparent construction. In the set of fake concepts that
we impose on messy reality, they're unusually candid about their fakeness. Their arbitrary
nature is kind enough to be apparent and obvious.
Many concepts are much less wearing-their-fakeness-on-their-sleeve. Constellations don't
bear all that much resemblance to actual stars, so it's easy to avoid getting confused. But a
lot of concepts really look quite similar to the thing they're modeling, and are therefore much
more seductive, mesmerizing, convincing, befuddling. Much more in-the-way, much more
likely to distract, much harder to set aside and see past.
The concept Harry's mind had of the rubber eraser as a single object was obvious
nonsense.
It was a map that didn't and couldn't match the territory.

Human beings modeled the world using stratiﬁed levels of organization, they had
separate thoughts about how countries worked, how people worked, how organs worked,
how cells worked, how molecules worked, how quarks worked.
When Harry's brain needed to think about the eraser, it would think about the rules that
governed erasers, like "erasers can get rid of pencil-marks". Only if Harry's brain needed
to predict what would happen on the lower chemical level, only then would Harry's brain
start thinking - as though it were a separate fact - about rubber molecules.
But that was all in the mind.
Harry's mind might have separate beliefs about rules that governed erasers, but there
was no separate law of physics that governed erasers.
Harry's mind modeled reality using multiple levels of organization, with diﬀerent beliefs
about each level. But that was all in the map, the true territory wasn't like that, reality
itself had only a single level of organization, the quarks, it was a uniﬁed low-level process
obeying mathematically simple rules.
It is genuinely diﬃcult to notice that an eraser is something other than "an eraser"—to
circumvent the well-intentioned shortcutting that our brains are so practiced at doing.
And to be clear: it's usually not necessary to notice that the mental category "eraser" is
glossing over a bunch of detail. It usually does not matter; our concepts are ubiquitous in
large part because they tend to be suﬃcient, adequate for our purposes.
But there are times when it's absolutely crucial to be un-hypnotized, when it's absolutely
crucial to be aware of the diﬀerence between [what's happening] and [the layer of
interpretation we've draped like a blanket over what's happening]. 
And there's something frightening (to me, at least) about the idea of such a crucial moment
arising and people not noticing it, because they aren't even aware that they're draping a
blanket. Or noticing that they need to set aside the blanket, but not knowing how to actually
do so.
Which is why I've devoted so many of my resources to developing naturalism. It's an
important facet of mature rationalist practice, and it's mostly missing from our collective
toolkit.
Notice, though, that "naturalism" is itself a concept. It's a constellation painted somewhat
arbitrarily over a multidimensional cluster of phenomena, pretending to be real. It's easy to
say that X is a part of naturalism and Y is not, and to forget that there just isn't any boundary
out there in the territory.
 

But in order to properly draw your attention to the cluster, I think I sort of have to paint those
lines. Human brains (mine included) have a really hard time getting excited about vast
collections of vaguely adjacent points; in order to produce something useful and
comprehensible, I have to pretend that there's a Thing, there.
I think doing so is instrumentally useful, and I think that (when done honestly, as this intro
sequence is attempting to do) it's not actually misleading, or self-undermining. This is a
fundamental thesis of naturalism: that there are points, and there are paintings we
superimpose upon them, and that these things are diﬀerent. That the constellations are of a
wholly diﬀerent nature than the stars.
Doesn't mean we don't need the conceptual overlay. We just want to know, in any given
moment, whether we're dealing more with paintings, or more with the things they're meant
to depict.

The constellation I will paint in this sequence is a single sentence. It's a sentence I built one
word at a time, sketched atop a cluster of ﬁve stars I've picked out from my view of the night
sky. 
The sentence is a summary of naturalism after-the-fact. It will do almost nothing to help you
understand the stars themselves, the real thing that I try to do with my mind day in and day
out. 
But it may serve to guide your attention to those stars. It may prompt you to look more
closely, for yourself, at the reality hidden behind the tidy painting.
The sentence, which I will discuss piece by piece throughout my introductory sequence, is
this: 
 
 
The sentence forms the outline of my sequence, more or less:
Knowing
The Territory
Observation
Patient Observation
Direct Observation
My only goal in this sequence is to communicate what I mean by the sentence, "Knowing the
territory takes patient and direct observation." 
Here is what will happen in this sequence: I will pick out the concepts that seem central to
my understanding of naturalism; I will name them with words; and I will do my best to tell
you what I mean by those words.
That is all.
There are a few things you might expect from an introductory sequence that I will not even
try to accomplish. I want to be clear about my intentions.
I will not try to argue for the truth of the proposition the sentence picks out. It's true, I think,
that knowing the territory takes patient and direct observation. But I won't try to convince
you of that here.
I won't tell you what would change my mind, or what I'd expect to see if I were wrong. I
won't tell you how I think you could ﬁnd out if I were correct, or if I were not. I will not
present evidence. I will not engage with counterarguments.
Inasmuch as I'm making a claim, you're right to want that sort of thing from me. But I'll
disappoint you, for now, on this front. I cannot do very much at once; for me, just saying
what I mean without misleading anyone is quite enough to be getting on with.
I will not try to argue that naturalism is important, either. Or, at least, not directly or on
purpose. I won't say much of anything about when it matters, or why. This is also a
worthwhile topic, but it's beyond the scope of this sequence.

Finally I will not try to help you learn naturalism. I do have a sometimes eﬀective curriculum
at this point, and I've even published a sort of proto-naturalism introductory course that you
can take at your own pace online; but I will not be presenting anything like that here.
What I will try to do is pick out the concepts that are central to naturalism, name them with
words, and tell you what I mean by those words. 
It will take me seven-and-a-half essays, the ﬁrst of which you have nearly ﬁnished.
 
When we are done here, I will write more things. When I write those things, I will sometimes
use the term "naturalism". And if this sequence is successful, people who have read it will
know what I'm talking about. 
People who have not read this sequence will say "What is naturalism?", and I will ﬁnally be
able to answer their question to my satisfaction.

Knowing the territory takes patient and direct observation. Let us begin, then, with
"knowing".

Knowing
I'm going to draw some practical distinctions among types of knowledge, as an attempt to
tap into your intuitions and avoid having to give some convoluted, ivory-tower deﬁnition of
the word.  I request that you try not to get distracted by where I've drawn my distinctions—
the precise placement of the borders is not the point of the exercise. The point of the
exercise is to shine your attention on the richness, depth, and complexity of your capacity to
know—that the word "know" means more than one thing.
Let's begin with a little formative assessment.
— Do you know what comes out of your kitchen faucet?
— Do you know what glaciers are made of?
— Do you know what those big white ﬂuﬀy things in the sky are?
If so, then you are familiar with water. When someone talks about it, you're not completely
lost.
 
— Do you know at what temperature water boils?
— Do you know the atomic composition of an ordinary water molecule?
— Do you know what percentage of your body's volume is water?
If so, then you know some facts about water. Your concept of water contains (at minimum) a
few isolated pieces of accurate information.
— Do you know the way water sounds when it pours into a cup?
— Do you know how water feels when it runs over your skin?
— Do you know the look of a stream's surface as it glitters in the sun?
If so, then you are able to identify water when you encounter it in real life. You have direct,
experiential data. You are able to predict how various encounters with water will impact your
senses, and you probably recognize water when those sensations occur (at least sometimes).
— Do you know what happens if you leave a beer bottle in the freezer overnight?
— Do you know how a water mill grinds grain into ﬂour?
— Do you know why it rains?
If so, then you probably have at least one model[1] of water.
Whether or not that model is explicit, it includes enough structure that you can predict the
behavior of water in various situations, even if those situations are outside of your own direct
experience. Your model might be rudimentary, in which case the above questions probably
produced hesitation or "sort of?" and you'd maybe only be able to produce a short

paragraph in response to each. Or your model might be rich and deep, in which case your
"yes" was conﬁdent, and you could in principle write multiple essays on the subject.
— Do you know how to swim?
— Do you know what to expect when applying watercolor paints to a wet canvas?
— Do you know how to make sea water safe to drink?
If so, then you have some practical mastery of water. It's not just that you recognize water,
or that you know some things about it, or that you can predict its behavior—your models of
water are integrated with your models of yourself and other parts of the world, accurately
and deeply enough that when you personally interact with water in real life, things tend to go
more or less as you intend (at least in certain kinds of situations).
 
Breaking the format of the pop quiz now, to ask a more diﬃcult question:
Can you name other things you know as intimately and thoroughly as water? Is there some
swath of the territory with which you have extensive familiarity, lots of factual knowledge,
rich predictive and explanatory models, and also practical mastery in a wide variety of
situations? In other words, where do you think you might have deep mastery ?
One such domain that's likely common: many people have this portfolio of knowledge when
it comes to driving cars. The average American spends a little under an hour a day in a car,
so if you're like the average American in this respect (and also you're the one doing most of
the driving for your household), then you've plausibly spent over three thousand hours
behind the wheel in the past ten years. And if so, I expect you've deeply mastered driving[2].
If you've deeply mastered driving, then you have extensive familiarity with all sorts of
driving-related tasks and phenomena. You recognize left-turn-only lanes, brake pedals, stop

signs, curves in the road, the hazard lights button on your dashboard, erratic driving,
potholes, high beams, deer, and so on.
You probably have tons of factual knowledge related to driving, as well, even if it's been
many years since you've taken a written test. If an inquisitive fourteen-year-old were sitting
in the passenger seat, you could produce all sorts of relevant bits of data, such as what
speeds they should expect to drive on what kinds of roads, or what ﬂuids they'll need to put
into their car at what frequencies, or how many wheels most cars have, or what papers
they'll need if they get pulled over or have a minor accident.
You probably also have rich, complex models of driving itself, organized to allow you to make
reasonable predictions about driving-related situations and phenomena. If your car breaks
down on the road, you might or might not know how to ﬁx it, but I bet you at least pull over
to the side, because you know how roads work, and you know implicitly that if you stay put,
other cars will come up behind you at high speeds and possibly crash into you. If I oﬀered
you a large amount of money to ﬁll a hundred pages on "how driving works," you could
almost certainly do it, especially if I provided helpful prompts like "diﬀerences between
driving in cities vs. driving in rural areas" or "things that other drivers frequently get wrong."
And all of these diﬀerent kinds of knowledge—facts, familiarity, implicit and practical models
—they're all seamlessly integrated with an experienced driver's knowledge of themselves,
and with their knowledge of adjacent domains like travel, geography, weather, car
maintenance, the side eﬀects of medication, etc. An experienced driver doesn't (usually)
access their knowledge about driving via explicit lookup. They can do that, on request, but
most of the time they simply move through the world. They use their turn signal reﬂexively
in the middle of deep conversation with their passengers. When someone suddenly swerves
into their lane, they decelerate without deciding to decelerate. They stop for gas on road
trips.  They notice when something about their car just feels oﬀ. And they acquired most of
this knowledge in the process of developing the skills and habits required to safely operate
the vehicle.
This is what I mean by "knowing," in the sentence "Knowing the territory takes patient and
direct observation." By "knowing", I mean something like deep mastery.
[If you want extensive familiarity, accurate factual knowledge, richly detailed predictive
models, and thorough practical mastery of some part of] the territory (that is, if you want
deep mastery), then you will have to engage in patient and direct observation.

 
1. ^

There is a principled distinction to be made between models and theories. I'm not
making it here.
2. ^
If you're doing just ﬁne and enjoying this essay so far, skip this footnote. Otherwise, I
have some bonus words that might possibly help.
It was around this point when some of my beta readers noticed their frustration with
how slowly we were going. They found themselves falling out of the spacious,
expansive mode I had hoped they would be in. I think this is ﬁne to do, as long as you
think falling out of that mode is a good idea.
But I note that there is another thing you could do, if you're frustrated or bored, which
is to look at your own mind, notice the reactions that are happening, ask yourself what
they're happening in response to, and thereby ease back into wondering.
Many of us have words for the kinds of distinctions I'm trying to draw here, such as "S1
vs S2",' or "tacit vs explicit knowledge", or "declarative vs procedural knowledge". And
the thing about those distinctions is that they are a) useful, and b) curiosity-stoppers.
They tell us "don't worry, you already know this" so you can get back to building a
tower of interconnected concepts. Which is a good thing, most of the time, but it is a
bad thing some of the time, and I expect that many of my readers do not know how to
tell the diﬀerence. (I often do not know how to tell the diﬀerence.)
That is (in part) why we are going slowly here, and feeling our way forward without
much reliance on a large preexisting vocabulary. That large preexisting vocabulary is
good, but it is not perfect. In order to see its ﬂaws, you have to be able to stand outside
of it somehow. I'm trying to help you step at least a little bit outside of it.

The Territory
I don't know if you've ever had the experience of hiking in the wilderness with a map and
compass but no cell service. I recommend it, if you haven't. 
I somehow did not quite all-the-way understand what a map even is until I was lost on my
own under these circumstances. I knew in a "factual knowledge" sense that maps were
drawings of the land, and I'd even used them as a kid and teenager to help my family
navigate on road trips. But when I was lost in a national park, trying to ﬁnd my way back to
my car, I confronted the incompleteness of my knowledge of maps. There was a shift. 
My map had trail lines drawn on it, with labels like "Canyon Trail". I'd pause my walking to
look at the shape of "Canyon Trail", noting that it intersected "Overlook Trail" somewhere oﬀ
to the left of where I was standing. Then I would walk again—attempting, I think, to "follow
Canyon Trail to Overlook Trail". 
I would move back and forth between walking and map consultation, making sure I
remembered which way the trails were supposed to go, constantly placing and replacing
myself within the borders of the lines drawn on the paper. The more distressed I felt about
being lost, the more often I turned to the map, looking for something to hold on to.
The shift happened after... (this is sort of embarrassing, it's so simple. But it's true.) The shift
happened after, having oriented myself toward "North", I happened to lower the map a little
bit, probably out of exhaustion. I held it a bit below eye level, so that it was no longer taking
up my whole ﬁeld of vision. 
I looked at the squiggly blue line on the map, and the close-together lines that I knew
indicated steepness. And I saw to my left, because the map was not blocking my vision, a
creek. Up ahead, I saw a steep hill.
 
I realized that the blue line was probably a drawing of that creek.
 
The contour lines were a drawing of that hill. 
 
And then this wild rushing sensation began to wash over me. I was starting to get it. Slowly, I
tilted the paper in my hands from a vertical position, partially blocking my view...
...to a horizontal position, parallel to the ground. 
I held the map that way, looking out at the world the cartographer had tried to draw, and it
was as though the territory rose up to meet the map, while the map spread itself across the
surface of the territory. And I said to myself, "It's a picture!" 
For the ﬁrst time, I understood in a practical way that a map is meant to be a top-down
picture of the real world.

Before I had this realization, I wasn't behaving as though I knew myself to be in the territory,
using the map as a tool. I was acting as if I were traversing the map, using my body as a kind
of clunky video game controller. I had been treating the map as the terrain I "really" had to
navigate.
But once I stopped playing that game, and started actually traversing the forest I was in,
things went very diﬀerently. I spent most of my time looking at creeks and trees and hills,
making sure I knew how the real world around me was shaped. And from that perspective, I
looked down at the map to help me predict what I'd see next.
And I found my car shortly thereafter.
There are ways to increase some kinds of knowledge that largely involve staring at maps.
Perhaps your own map is not clearly labeled in places, or it's somehow inconsistent with
itself, or it doesn't match the map of an expert.
This is why it's often valuable to clearly articulate your beliefs, even just to yourself. It's
valuable to ask yourself what you expect, and to notice when you feel confused about that.
It's valuable to ask other people what they think, or to read their books and blog posts,
especially when you have reason to believe they know important things that you don't.
But the main thing a cartographer ought to be focused on, the vast majority of the time, is
the world itself.
I started studying "original seeing", on purpose and by that name, in 2018. What stood out
to me about my earliest exploratory experiments in original seeing is how alien the world is.
I don't mean that reality is weird or surprising. Nothing weird has ever happened, and all of
that. What I mean is... well, I think I should actually grab an Eliezer quote here:
Human intuitions were produced by evolution and evolution is a hack.  The same
optimization process that built your retina backward and then routed the optic cable
through your ﬁeld of vision, also designed your visual system to process persistent
objects bouncing around in 3 spatial dimensions because that's what it took to chase
down tigers.  But "tigers" are leaky surface generalizations - tigers came into existence
gradually over evolutionary time, and they are not all absolutely similar to each other. 
When you go down to the fundamental level, the level on which the laws are stable,
global, and exception-free, there aren't any tigers.  In fact there aren't any persistent
objects bouncing around in 3 spatial dimensions.
I started my earliest experimentation with some brute-force phenomenology. I picked up an
object, set it on the table in front of me, and progressively stripped away layers of perception
as I observed it. It was one of these things:
 

I wrote, "It's a SIM card ejection tool." 
I wrote some things about its shape and color and so forth (it was round and metal, with a
pointy bit on one end); and while I noted those perceptions, I tried to name some of the
interpretations my mind seemed to be engaging in as I went.

As I identiﬁed the interpretations, I deliberately loosened my grip on them: "I notice that
what I perceive as 'shadows' needn't be places where the object blocks rays of light; the
'object' could be two-dimensional, drawn on a surface with the appropriate areas shaded
around it." 
I noticed that I kept thinking in terms of what the object is for, so I loosened my grip on the
utility of the object, mainly by naming many other possible uses. I imagined inserting the
pointy part into soil to sow tiny snapdragon seeds, etching my name on a rock, and poking
an air hole in the top of a plastic container so the liquid contents will pour out more
smoothly. I've actually ended up keeping this SIM card tool on a keychain, not so I can eject
SIM trays from phones, but because it's a great stim; I can tap it like the tip of a pencil, but
without leaving dots of graphite on my ﬁnger.
I loosened my grip on several preconceptions about how the object behaves, mainly by
making and testing concrete predictions, some of which turned out to be wrong. For
example, I expected it to taste sharp and "metallic", but in fact I described the ﬂavor of the
surface as "calm, cool, perhaps lightly ﬂorid".
By the time I'd had my ﬁll of this proto-exercise, my relationship to the object had changed
substantially. I wrote:
My perceptions that seem related to the object feel very distinct from whatever is out
there impinging on my senses. ... I was going to simply look at a SIM card tool, and now I
want to wrap my soul around this little region of reality, a region that it feels
disrespectful to call a 'SIM card tool'. Why does it feel disrespectful? Because 'SIM card
tool' is how I use it, and my mind is trained on the distance between how I relate to my
perceptions of it, and what it is.
There aren't any tigers, and there aren't any SIM card tools, either. It now feels... almost
disgusting, to me, to lose sight of that. Disgusting like thinking of trees only as "lumber", and
cutting down entire rainforests as a result.
Which doesn't mean it's useless to conceptualize tigers and so forth. It absolutely is useful
and correct. The purpose of cartography is to draw cartoon pictures that are relatively useful
to travelers, and certain features of the cartoon pictures need to correspond to the real-world
not-actually-"tigers" to be useful. There exist for-real regions (or properties, or patterns) of
the territory itself that it makes sense to call "tigers", as long as that concept is doing the
right stuﬀ, such as paying rent in anticipated experiences.
But ever since I began my study of original seeing—ever since observing the so-called "SIM
card tool"—it has felt a little diﬀerent for me to use the word "territory".
I think that before, when I said "the territory", I must have accidentally meant something like
"the much bigger map; the thing I'm drawing a map of, which is basically like my map but a
lot more complex". 
Now I mean something like, "The thing that is made of something other than my own
perceptions and interpretations. The thing that resists my expectations, according to its own
rules. The thing that does not care what I think, or what I have happened to imagine."
In the sentence, "Knowing the territory takes patient and direct observation," what I mean by
"territory" is "the thing that is made of something other than my own perceptions and
interpretations".
Knowing [the thing that is made of something other than your own perceptions and
interpretations] takes patient and direct observation.

Next, there will be a short interlude on realness, and what it feels like to lower the map. Then
I'll talk about observation of the territory.

Interlude: On Realness
I have a ﬁnal line of thought on "the territory" that's a lot less tidy than what you've read
so far. Everything else in this sequence is a distillation, an attempt to communicate large
principles that I've brought into sharp focus over time. In this interlude, I'll be doing
something diﬀerent.
Here, I'll be sharing a thread of investigation that's still very much open for me. I'm not
entirely sure what it's about, but I think it has something to do with what it feels like to
lower the map.
If you're so inclined, I invite you to approach this as a fellow
naturalist/investigator/curious kitten. I invite you to puzzle with me over how you might
tell when you're heavily map-focused, and when you're not. What does it feel like to
lower the map, to have it knocked forcefully from your hands, or to suddenly encounter
something that's not mostly made of your own perceptions and interpretations? And how
does that sort of thing happen?
It is very interesting to me that it's possible for some things to feel especially real.
One morning in college, I was half-sleeping through a poetry lecture in a dim classroom,
when I looked out the window and saw a tree branch covered in spider silk. The silk
shimmered in the sunlight. Strands of it hung from the branch and wafted in the breeze,
and as they moved, the sunlight seemed to drip down the strands in waves. 
It caught me. I don't remember anything about the lecture, but I'll never forget the silk.
Seeing it felt a lot like waking up from a dream. That tree seemed more real than
anything in the classroom, and more real than anything else in my life from the previous
month.
 


I've puzzled over this perception of "realness" oﬀ and on for years. I've collected a lot of
reference experiences that are rich in this property, and I've tried to compare them to
each other.
Here are a few quick examples:
A person said, "I'll be real with you," and then began to say things that did in fact
seem more "real". My brain says they "stopped lying", but I think it's more
complicated than that.
Reciting the sentence "I have seen the smoke rising from the pipes of lonely men in
shirtsleeves leaning out of windows" (and also much of the rest of "The Love Song
Of J. Alfred Prufrock")
I was out for a walk in the early morning when I saw a patch of moss covered in
dew.
The main character Max in the Dave Eggers novel The Wild Things feels more real
to me than any other character I've encountered in ﬁction.
Once I was struggling with an essay, and had a feeling that I couldn't stop saying
"fake" things. So I decided to message a friend in text chat to tell him what I
wanted to say in the essay. Talking directly to him, it was much easier for me to say
"real" things instead.
To'ak's "Rain Harvest 2018" chocolate bar.
(This one's from my mom, a memory from when she was 6 or 7. She shared it
when I asked whether some of her experiences seem more "real" than others.) "I
was standing on a brick wall in my front yard with my arms held out and my face
into the wind. That is all. The feel of the wind, the presence of it all around me."
A few moments when I decided to stop [something? "trying for fake"?] and started
"trying for real" instead.
 
My current best guess about what these experiences have in common is the absence of
a strong map-focus, perhaps combined with engagement.
This is especially clear in the essay example. One of the hardest things for me about
writing an essay that's meant to be read by many other people is that I know many other
people may read it. Indeed, one of the hardest things for me about writing a letter to a
single other person is that I know another person may read it. It's much harder than
journaling. 
In journaling, I say whatever I'm thinking, usually in whatever way it ﬁrst occurs to me to
do so. When I try to improve on the way that ﬁrst occurred to me, I check alternatives
against my sense of what seems right and good.
When I write to other people, though, I also check alternatives against my expectations
about what their minds will do when they read it, what they'll think I thought when I
wrote it, and whether the world seems to them the way it seems to me. In other words,
I'm less focused on whatever it is I'm trying to talk about, and more focused on maps
(and maps of maps, and maps of maps of maps). 
The more people there are, and the more I care about how they'll respond to what I say,
the deeper and more salient these layers of anticipated interpretation become.
Sometimes I completely lose track of both "what I want to say" and "what seems right
and good".

And when I manage to get back on track—often by talking to one particular friend, or by
"journaling" in another tab instead of "essaying"—it feels just like lowering the map. It
feels like looking to the left and seeing an actual creek, looking ahead and seeing a hill
that I could climb with my feet if I wanted. It feels like waking up from a dream.
I think all the other experiences on the list involve something that prompts a similar
map-lowering motion.
 

Observation
Imagine that you meet someone you're attracted to at a party. At one point, they smile at
you, and you notice. You're pretty sure they like you, but you really want to know whether
they like you like you.
You don't act on this in any particular way, but you do spend the whole next week thinking
about it. You think about other people who have been into you, and about people who have
not, and the diﬀerences between them. You muse about what sort of taste in romantic
partners you imagine the person might have. By the end of the week, you're weighing your
virtues and vices, trying to decide whether you're even worthy of love.
(If this seems alien to you, I hope it is at least true to your experiences of some humans.)
In the moment when you noticed you were attracted to the person, you made an
observation. In the moment when you noticed their smile, you made another. In the moment
when you noticed your curiosity, you made another.
But as soon as you vanished into your own musings, you were no longer making
observations. You were no longer collecting data. Instead, you were interpolating,
extrapolating, ﬁlling in the gaps with stories and guesses, processing and reprocessing.
Everything that followed, in the week after the party, took place inside your map—analysis,
interpretation, reasoning, reﬂection.
In Arthur Conan Doyle's "A Scandal in Bohemia," Sherlock Holmes lectures Watson on the
diﬀerence between seeing and observing:
"You see, but you do not observe. The distinction is clear. For example, you have
frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to this room."
"Frequently."
"How often?"
"Well, some hundreds of times."
"Then how many are there?"
"How many? I don't know."
"Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is just my point. Now, I
know that there are seventeen steps, because I have both seen and observed."
I don't know how many steps there are on the staircase up to my own living room, either.
Setting aside the question of prioritization, and whether I should be turning my attention
there—what is it, exactly, that Watson and I are doing with the steps?
My guess is that we've taken some initial impressions—a few moments of impact from the
external world—and used those points to draw a constellation. Every time we walk up the
steps, we do almost all of our processing on the constellation, rather than on the points of
light in the sky. 

Most of our "seeing" the stairs is happening inside of our maps. We observe just enough to
recognize that we're about to encounter the well-understood "stairs" entity, and then we
superimpose our "stairs" concept over whatever sensations are happening to us, and stop
paying attention. To the extent that our brains record anything, it's that we "climbed up the
stairs," rather than that we felt some number of impacts under each of our feet, while the
muscles in our legs contracted and our heart rate climbed slightly, etc.

Imagine that you do end up asking the cute person from the party to meet you for coﬀee,
but when the day comes, you're extremely distracted by a disaster at work, one you'll have
to return to as soon as the date is over. Despite a whole hour of conversation, you leave
feeling like you've learned almost nothing about them.

Crucial data was all around you, but while you saw it, you failed to observe any of it.
It is hardest to make fresh observations about things you have seen many times. The stairs,
long-held beliefs, attitudes you were raised with. The more often you superimpose your
drawing of a constellation over points of light in the sky, the more opaque your drawing
becomes. 
It probably doesn't really matter that I have seen-but-failed-to-observe my stairs. I never
miss a step, and I'm not in a murder mystery whose solution might depend on how many
steps there are. 
It certainly does matter, though, if I have seen-but-failed-to-observe the way I make requests
of my child, especially if I haven't even noticed the distinction. If I believe I've observed
when I've really only seen, I'm much less likely to start paying attention, or to hypothesize
that I may have gotten something wrong. If we're going to be close for a long time, we need
to be able to communicate with each other, not just with the cartoon drawings we habitually
plaster over each other's faces.
It also matters if I've seen-but-failed-to-observe the factors that cause me to continue on my
current career path, what I count as evidence, or my default response when my expectations
are violated.
Seeing-but-not-observing is a failure to make contact with a bit of territory that is right in
front of you. It is standing at the bank of a river while staring at the part of your map labeled
"river". Often that's good enough; but sometimes the river is ﬂooded when you need to
cross, and then you really have to lower your map and make contact with crucial data. You
have to look at the world itself, or else you'll drown.
In the sentence "Knowing the territory takes patient and direct observation," this is what I
mean by "observation." I mean actual contact with the territory. Looking at the stars
themselves, instead of letting the constellation ﬁll your mind as your eyes glaze over.
Knowing the territory takes patient and direct contact with the territory.
In the next two essays, I'll talk about two ways of being in contact with the territory: directly,
and patiently.
 

Direct Observation
My dad's a retired science teacher, so my little brother and I began playing the "I'm not
touching you!" game unusually early.
In case you're not familiar with "I'm not touching you!", here's how it works.
Step 1: Ask your parents (or the internet or whatever) why you don't fall through the ﬂoor.
Step 2: Learn about electrostatic repulsion, and conclude that things never "really touch".
Step 3: Poke your sibling.
Step 4: When they say "Stop touching me!", insist that "I'm not touching you!"
Step 5: Find out whether your parents consider "technically correct" to be an adequate
defense. (They don't.)
It is true that things do not touch in the way we naively imagine. Their component atoms'
electrons repel each other. "Perfectly direct contact" does not ordinarily happen. 
Nonetheless, there is a big diﬀerence between the "not touching" that's happening when you
poke your sibling, and the "not touching" that's happening when you point at your sibling
from three meters away.
Similarly, there is no unmediated subjective experience of the territory. When you poke your
little brother's arm, your brain does something with those nerve signals to turn them into
phenomena, into the subjective experience of tactile sensations. The sensations are not the
nerve signals. There is always processing distance between your subjective experiences and
whatever is happening to your sense organs.
However, some processing distances are smaller than others. 
Consider the processing distance between [the electrostatic repulsion at your ﬁngertip] and
[your plan to test how upset you can make your brother before your parents intervene].
Although your plan exists mostly inside your head, it deﬁnitely has something to do with that
electrostatic repulsion, in about the same way that a pointing ﬁnger has something to do
with whatever it's pointing at. A plan is made of anticipations, imaginings, desires, and so
forth; yet it isn't completely out of contact with the territory.
But consider the distance between [the electrostatic repulsion at your ﬁngertip] and [the
immediate tactile sensations of your ﬁnger]. The subjective sensations still exist only inside
your head, but the processing distance is much smaller. Those sensations put you in closer
contact with the underlying reality of electrostatic repulsion. Compared to imaginings or
desires, they are much more tightly entangled with what's happening out there.
Here's how I think contact with the territory works. 
For me to make contact with my brother's arm, there are three conditions that must be met,
three entities that must coincide.

Presence. An arm must be present. There must be a region of territory available to be
contacted. I can't make much contact with my brother's arm if he's in another city.
Personhood. There must be a contactor, a mind participating in the experience of
contact, a place where attending occurs. I can't make contact in the relevant sense if
I'm under general anesthesia, even if my brother's arm happens to brush my ﬁnger
while I'm under.
Sensation. There must be an experience of pressure on the skin of my hand as it
presses up against my brother's arm. There has to be some kind of sensation I might
become aware of. I can't make contact if I've lost all the nerves in my ﬁngers to
frostbite.
Presence, personhood, and sensation. Lose any of the three of these, and there's no longer
contact in the sense I mean.
But note that each of these conditions can obtain to a greater or lesser extent, depending on
the situation. It isn't all or nothing.
In the context of studying arms, a memory of an arm involves greater presence than does
the description of a ﬁctional arm in a novel. A photograph has more presence than a
memory.
Presence of arms: actual arm > photograph of an arm > memory of an arm > ﬁctional
description of an arm
Personhood is similarly variable. A person's body can be physically present while their mind
is otherwise occupied. They can selectively disengage parts of themselves when
encountering a topic they'd prefer not to think about, letting experiences "bounce oﬀ" or
relegating them to a "sandbox" for safety. It's possible to limit the mental space in which
attending occurs, without eliminating it entirely—or to expand that space beyond what's
available by default. This is what phrases like "showing up", "checking out", and "blankface"
refer to.
Finally, just as a sighted person can wear sunglasses or even a blindfold, sensation isn't all or
nothing. It's possible to be more or less numb to sensations at the point of contact, even
when all your nerves are in working order.
Numbness often happens when top-down processes overwrite bottom-up processes, as in
the Ponzo illusion:
 

If the top blue line looks longer to you at ﬁrst, it's probably because you're interpreting the
visual sensations through an expectation that things near the bottom of the image are

"closer", while things near the top are "farther away". If the top line were farther away, then
it would have to be longer than the bottom line to produce the visual stimuli you encounter.
This interpretation probably happens so quickly that your raw visual sensations are
overwritten by it. To see the blue lines as the same length, if you even can, you have to
deliberately back up and peel oﬀ a thick layer of perceptual interpretation, excavating
sensations that correspond more directly to the lines themselves.
But if you do peel back that interpretive layer, then you increase sensation at the point of
contact with this image. It's like removing your gloves and actually touching the snow. You
are feeling more of the image itself, rather than feeling your own processing systems.
There is a gradient from "seeing" (in the Holmesian sense) to "observation", and it is
identical to the gradient from low to high contact with the territory. Dial up presence,
personhood, or sensation, and contact with the territory gets more direct, more naked.
Gloves oﬀ, touching the snow. Dial them way down, and you're ﬂoating miles above the real
world.
(The "how" is tricky. That's a whole diﬀerent sequence. But even before ﬁguring out how to
do it, it's worth considering that there may exist the possibility of movement toward more
direct contact. It can help a lot to merely be aware that your experiences exist somewhere
along the gradient from low to high contact with the territory.)
In the sentence "Knowing the territory takes patient and direct observation", this is what I
mean by "direct". I mean showing up as a whole person, in the presence of real-world data,
and getting your preconceptions out of the way so you can be sensitive to what is there. 
Knowing the territory takes patient and naked observation.
 

Patient Observation
When a person ﬁrst begins to study naturalism with me, I say to them almost nothing that
I've written in this sequence. 
That might very well be a mistake; I might get better results if I knew some short
combination of words that would cause them to correctly understand, intellectually, what we
are doing and why, before we started.
But in fact I bank on the person's trust in me a bit, and begin by helping them establish
consistent habits of observation. 
If they're interested in studying confusion, I ask them to tap their leg every time they notice
they're confused. I ask them to keep a log book in which they record a few words about their
experiences of confusion each day. I ask them to make predictions about what it will be like
to notice confusion—what kind of situation will be happening and how they will know in the
moment that they are confused—and to compare their observations to their predictions.
And then, throughout what has so far proven to be about a three month program, I never
shift our focus away from consistent habits of observation. It's not just where I start. It's the
entire curriculum.
From a practical perspective, this dogged persistence is the foundation of naturalism. "Direct
observation of the territory", without patience, gets you something like a bag of tricks.
Valuable tricks, but still tricks. Isolated mental motions made when they are convenient and
enjoyable, not when they are most needed.
With patience, though, you get a life-long practice of epistemic rationality.
So the whole naturalism program, from start to ﬁnish, consists of the establishment,
improvement, and maintenance of consistent habits of observation. Consistent and
ceaseless, without any sense that "and then we'll be done observing and get back to
normal". When my students and I meet, we are constantly talking about what daily practice
looked like over the past week, what was too heavy to implement as a regular routine, and
how they personally can slow down enough to thoroughly observe. We continue in this way
until they no longer seem to need me to ask those questions for them. The program is meant
to introduce a new normal.
The rest of what I talk about in this sequence is sprinkled in, sure. It's implicit in the
questions I ask, the approaches I encourage, and "my whole vibe". Like a catalyst, or like
spices, those other parts are crucial to the recipe. But patience is the engine that makes all
of it go. None of what I've written here gets oﬀ the ground unless it is practiced as an
ongoing discipline.
I suspect that the thing I'm calling "patience" really is a single core capacity, or a single
virtue; but it can express itself in multiple patterns of behavior. I'd like to talk about three
patient behavior patterns: tenacity, openness, and thoroughness.
In my mind, the paradigmatic example of tenacity is marathon training. Not marathon
racing, but the training program a runner goes through to prepare for their ﬁrst marathon.

After an initial adjustment period, training for endurance athletics is mainly diﬃcult because
it requires commitment to the maintenance of a routine, not because it requires intense
exertion. Most of the time you're not running anywhere near as fast as you can, and at least
until race day, you're not running as far as you can either. On any given day, you're running
a comfortable-for-you amount—but you're doing it day after day after day, without fail, for
months at a time. The distance running motto is "small, consistent eﬀorts".
The facet of patience I'm calling tenacity is the ability to exert small, consistent eﬀorts.
The reason tenacity is foundational to naturalism is that it's required for any kind of
maintenance. Knowledge of the territory requires not just contact with the territory, but
maintenance of that contact. Bumping up against the world and bouncing right back oﬀ
again is not enough; you have to reliably return after you bounce.
We are bound to see things as we are, rather than as they are; but we are not bound to
always see them as we were when we ﬁrst encountered them. It is possible to observe again,
and again, and again; if you do that with naked directness, and with the relentlessness of
marathon training, your perceptual systems will inevitably adjust to perceive reality more
accurately over time.
 
The next facet of patience I'd like to talk about is "openness", in the sense of "non-closure".
When someone comes to me for advice on a long-standing adaptive challenge, the most
common recommendation I give is, "Stop trying to solve this problem for a while. Start
investigating the underlying territory instead."
I recently chatted with someone who was worried that she might be a narcissist, and wanted
to know what to do about it. She gave me permission to share these (anonymized) excerpts
from our conversation.

Logan: my ﬁrst thought is that this sounds like a situation where you'd do well to put
"what should i do about it?" on hold for a good three months, and focus instead on "what
is actually happening? how can i tell? what is it like? what is my brain doing by default in
various situations, and which situations are the ones i care about here? which
phenomena and mental motions seem important for understanding what's happening
here?"
Crystal: That seems smart. But, seems better to know I am a narcissist than to be
uncertain about it for three months... more comfortable I mean
Logan: i imagine that you have a question like "am i a narcissist?" in your head, and it's
really salient because things you care about depend on the answer to it, and it's
uncomfortable to not know the answer because you'd ideally orient to the two diﬀerent
worlds diﬀerently, and when you don't know which you're in you don't' know how to
orient. is that right?
Crystal: Yeah
Here, Crystal is demonstrating a need for closure. She is uncomfortable (understandably!)
with being uncertain. She would like to make plans for the future. Those plans may be
substantially diﬀerent in worlds where she believes the answer to the question "am I a
narcissist?" is "yes" than in the world where it's "no." She wants to know what to work on, in
herself and in her relationships. She wants to know what to expect.
So when I recommend to her that she deliberately hang out in uncertainty while she
gradually increases her contact with the territory, it feels bad to her.
Back to the conversation, jumping ahead a bit:
Logan: i tend to operate under the conjecture that when there is a thing that's been a
problem for most of a person's life, that person's way of conceptualizing the problem is
very likely to be incorrect or incomplete in ways that make investigation that's not driven
by the concept more productive than investigation that is driven by the concept.
Crystal: The concept being "narcissism"?
Logan: yeah.
Crystal: How is it driven by the concept or not? What does that mean?
Logan: investigation that's driven by the concept looks like: how would i know if i'm a
narcissist? what things are evidence for or against? where would i look for evidence of
narcissism? what would disconﬁrming evidence look like? what are alternative
hypotheses? how might i test them?
Crystal: > investigation that's driven by the concept looks like: how would i know ...
That sounds like me
Logan: investigation that's not driven by the concept might look like: what does it feel
like to be worried about whether i'm a narcissist? what seems to be at stake? if i go
through the week and write down times when something related to the-thing-i-care-
about-here happened, what do i end up writing? what was happening around me and in
my head during those times? which of the things happening in my experience seems
most closely tied to the-thing-i-care-about-here? how can i tell when that thing is
happening in my head? if i watch for times when that thing is happening in my head and
write down instances, what do i write?

in other words, it's possible to gain a lot of information about what's actually going on
without having pre-decided most of what's going on. my suspicion is that this is a time
when it makes sense to not pre-decide most of what's going on before you try to really
seriously get in contact with the relevant region of territory
I often call the latter type of investigation—the kind that's not driven by the concept
—"exploratory investigation". I've never used a word for the former type, but here I'm
inclined to dub it "certainty seeking".
Certainty seeking is often the right approach. It's the right approach when you have good
reason to think you mostly understand the situation and just need to ﬁll in some details, or to
determine the truth values of a couple central propositions. In that case, a more exploratory
investigation style would be needlessly ineﬃcient.
But people very often fall into certainty seeking when they are impatient. They already have
a sketch, and for one reason or another, they just want to ﬁll in the details and be done.
They're willing to shift a line here or there, but mainly they're motivated to complete the
drawing. "All I want to know is, is this narcissism or isn't it? Yes or no?!"
A person in the grips of this impatient mode is not so much trying to learn the shape of
reality, as to crystalize a satisfying concept so they can relax into certainty.
There are advantages and disadvantages to both approaches, of course. My point is that
nearly all truth-seeking beneﬁts from a combined approach to investigation. You need to be
able to move back and forth. Impatience tends to crowd out direct exploration, and ensures
that you'll mainly ﬁnd whatever you have already decided to look for.
Openness, in the sense I mean, is the ability to observe without desperation for an answer.
But, what is it to observe without desperation? I've told you what this facet of patience lacks,
but what does it consist of?
Today I saw a raven do a barrel roll[1]. 
I'd heard that ravens could turn over in the air, and even do backﬂips occasionally, and I'd
seen pictures of ravens upside down. But when I saw this one do a barrel roll right in front of
me—well, above me, I suppose—I felt... "surprise" is too simple. I felt glued to the ground,
knocked sideways, and opened up all at once. I felt awe. I shouted up to the raven, "You just
did a barrel roll! What?! That was awesome! You are awesome!"
Before I saw the raven, I was out on a walk through the country, down a dirt road with a few
houses and lots of trees. Earlier on my walk, I took a picture of some kind of insect nest, or
perhaps a fungus, on the underside of a leaf. I peered through a hedge to see if I could work
out what kind of crop my secretive neighbors were growing. I smelled some little pink ﬂowers
on a tree and found that their scent was a lot like caramel and roses mixed with grass. I pet a
dog and asked her if she could smell my cat (which she probably could, but she wasn't
feeling chatty). I learned that the acorn hats have dried out enough to go "crunch"
underfoot. 
My state of mind was one of open, gentle exploration. And it's from that state of mind that
the raven was able to move me in the way it did.
I can imagine an alternate walk in which I was trying to determine whether or not my local
ravens can do aerial acrobatics. I think there would have been some frustration with the
many ravens I saw along the way who were not even ﬂying, let alone ﬂying upside down. (I
wouldn't have observed any leaf bottoms at all.) And I think that seeing the barrel roll would
still have been very cool, but it also would have felt a lot more like relief and completion; like
the end of something, rather than the beginning. Like closing, more than like opening.

But more importantly, I never would have set out on such a walk in the ﬁrst place. It simply
would never have occurred to me. I saw a raven do a barrel roll because I was there when it
happened. I was in the right place, and I was open.
Openness feels like being there for whatever happens. Being down. 
It's almost-but-not-quite the opposite of purposefulness. It's the canvas on which purposes
get painted. A central strategy of naturalism is to put most of your purposefulness points into
choosing where to bring your canvas. If that canvas is already full, then there's nowhere for
new and surprising things to land. 
Openness feels like putting myself in the middle of something alive, looking around, and
letting whatever I observe move me however it does.
The ﬁnal facet of patience I'd like to discuss is thoroughness.
When I think of thoroughness, I imagine holding a puzzle box as I turn it around and around,
trying to visually examine it from all angles. No matter how accurate and precise my
observations of the box from one particular angle, it is only possible to see at most three
faces of a cube from any single vantage point. To know the whole surface of a cube, I either
have to move the cube, or I have to move myself.
If the puzzle box is sitting on your desk, and you glance over at it several times as you go
about your day, you'll most likely catch it from a few diﬀerent angles by accident. So tenacity
and openness together naturally result in some amount of thoroughness.
This is the principle behind what Anna Salamon has called "the 50/50 rule". According to (my
own interpretation of) the 50/50 rule, 50% of the intellectual progress you make on
something will happen while you are deliberately trying to make progress on that thing in
particular. The other 50% will happen while you are engaged with other things: riding the
bus, playing with your kids, designing a board game, identifying a bird. 
It's important to spend a lot of your time doing things other than focusing on your Main
Project. This is not just because your brain needs to "rest"; it is also important to do other
things because you will see diﬀerent faces of the puzzle box while you are dancing at a salsa
club than while you are staring at a white board.
It is possible to ﬁnd additional vantage points on purpose, and I call this capacity "perceptual
dexterity".
When I look at the pen that is on my desk right now, I see a pen. That is, when I direct my
gaze and attention toward the part of my visual ﬁeld where light is reﬂecting oﬀ the surface
of the pen, my concept of "pen" is active.
When I see the pen as a pen, certain parts of my experience stand out to me, while others
are discarded. My attention lands on the button at the top, which I could push to extrude the
nib. It lands on the thin cylindrical shape, and I can feel myself preparing to orient my hand
to that shape in a way that would allow me to hold the pen for writing. 
But the reﬂection of the clip in the shiny metal surface of the cylinder doesn't occur to me,
when I see the pen as a pen. To notice that reﬂection, I have to see the pen a little diﬀerently
than I would by default. I have to rotate to a slightly diﬀerent vantage point—to rotate my
mind into a slightly diﬀerent conﬁguration, one that processes information a bit diﬀerently.
I don't have to primarily activate my "pen" concept just because I happen to be looking at a
pen. I can choose to rotate my mind however I want, and then look at the thing in front of
me. 

If I rotate my mind toward "goose", what ﬁrst stands out to me is the hole in the front, which
seems to break an otherwise aerodynamic nose. Maybe the air would get stuck in there, if
this pen had wings and tried to ﬂy.
If I rotate toward "aggression", the ﬁrst thing that stands out is the place where the clip is
attached to the body of the pen, as I evaluate its thickness and wonder how much force it
would take to snap the clip oﬀ and leave a sharp edge.
When I'm chewing on a problem and feeling a little stuck, one of the ﬁrst things I do is ask
myself, "If this were a boat, what sort of boat would it be?" There's nothing special about
boats for problem solving, but answering this question forces me to rotate my mind into a
conﬁguration that is probably quite diﬀerent from whatever I was stuck in before. If this pen
were a boat, it would be a sleek but sturdy racing boat with a silver sail and an athletic
captain steering.
The more perceptually dexterous you are, the less constrained you are to see only what you
saw in your very ﬁrst glance. You are not trapped in your most familiar perspective. 
Thoroughness is what results from the successful exercise of perceptual dexterity. It is
observation that continues well beyond familiarity, traversing many vantage points to
triangulate reality.
The thing that tenacity, openness, and thoroughness have in common is what I mean by
"patience". It's the opposite of "rushing", the opposite of "just wanting to be done", or the
opposite of "jumping to conclusions". Patience is taking the time to discover the real shape
of the world.
By "patient observation", then, I mean observation that is tenacious, open, and thorough.
Knowing the territory requires direct observation that takes its time to discover the shape of
the world.
1. ^
It was technically an aileron roll.

Naturalism
According to me, this sequence has been pretty darn abstract. 
That was kind of on purpose. It's the opposite of what I like to do, of what I think I'm good at.
I much prefer to engage with an actual speciﬁc thing, and to share the details of my
experience as I go. This big picture stuﬀ is really not my jam. 
But I've been trying to paint a really big picture anyway, to describe an entire perspective on
investigation, and rationality, and maybe life. I hope it's been much easier to read than it
was for me to write. And I hope that if, at some future point, I dive into the little details of
particular exercises and techniques, you'll be able to contextualize them as more than just
trinkets, or rituals that are tedious to little purpose.
But I'm so tired of it. I'm exhausted by all this abstraction. I want to touch the ground. I want
to show you what it actually looks like to live a life full of patient and direct observation.
I can tell you that there's a magnifying glass in my pocket, which I use regularly. I can tell
you that I turned the soles of my bare feet toward the sky last week, so that I could feel the
snow falling on them. I can tell you that when I put "it seems to me" at the front of so many
of my sentences, it's not false humility, or insecurity, or a verbal tic. (It's a deliberate
reﬂection on the distance between what exists in reality, and the constellations I've sketched
on my map.)
I can tell you dozens of facts like these, about my experience of myself and of the world.
Hundreds. But none of those means much. Not on its own.
The problem is, this whole thing is founded on patience, which is diﬃcult to demonstrate in
an essay. It's hard to show you all at once the myriad ways a thousand tiny moments add up
to one big thing that matters.
Still, they do add up to something.
What they add up to is that I am a naturalist. I was raised to be a naturalist, and it worked. I
was raised to be someone who yearns to know the territory through patient and direct
observation. My childhood memories are full of mushroom hunting, ﬁnding newts under logs,
following game trails, reading the geological histories in the rock layers whenever we
traveled, and sketching the paths of Jupiter's moons with a red ﬂashlight beside my
telescope. 

My upbringing emphasized that the world is an inﬁnity of wonders; unfathomably many in a
single handful of dirt. It taught me that knowledge is power. It taught me that although
school and books and the ediﬁce of scientiﬁc inquiry can help you orient and make sense of
your observations, there is exactly one key in the whole universe that can unlock the power
of knowledge—and that key is your eagerness to go out into the world, day after day, and
look with your own eyes at what is in front of you.
There isn't space in a concluding essay to properly describe the habits comprising this way
of life, or their result. But if I've communicated even half of what I hoped to in this sequence,
you may now be in a good position to ﬁnd out for yourself.
Think of some problem you have, something you want to get a better handle on or otherwise
ﬁgure out. Maybe it's something to do with your career path, a place where you're stuck in
your research, or the way you spend time with your kids. Anything where you're yearning for
deeper, more masterful knowledge than you have right now.
(There can be a lot of inertia in the ﬂow from paragraph to paragraph. Here is a place to
pause. Even if you're not up for a thought experiment right now, I request that you count to
twelve before reading on, just in case something comes to you by accident as soon as I've
stopped shouting words into your head.)
Now imagine that there's no internet, and not a single expert available to advise you. Your
only books are the ones you write. Your only resources are your body, your mind, and the
world itself.
If I wanted to know morel mushrooms, I would look for them beneath an old hardwood tree in
a Midwestern forest in spring. I'd go there right about the time the mayapples are in bloom. I

would look at the ground, in damp places where the autumn leaves have partially
decomposed. That is the natural habitat of morels.
What is the natural habitat of the thing that interests you? Where could you go to observe it
directly? How could you invite it to impinge on your experience? And what, if anything, is in
the way of you being open to it when it does?
If you're not sure of its natural habitat, then what's your best guess, and how could you tell
when you're getting warmer? What might tip you oﬀ that some tendril of the thing's reality
has just brushed your mind? How might you recognize if now is the time to pay attention,
and to make a new guess about where to look next?
And what could you do to observe it over time, to see beyond your very ﬁrst impression?
What little habits might you adopt, like an athlete who always takes the stairs, to ensure that
you make frequent contact with this patch of territory in daily life? How might you record
your observations, and notice patterns that aren't apparent in any single moment?
If you wanted to increase your contact with the world, what is the very ﬁrst thing you would
change?
                                                This is what I mean by "naturalism".

