
Mechanics of Tradecraft
1. A non-magical explanation of Jeﬀrey Epstein
2. Addendum: A non-magical explanation of Jeﬀrey Epstein
3. Don't take the organizational chart literally

A non-magical explanation of Jeﬀrey
Epstein
On some level, in order to understand the society they live in, most people have to be
conspiracy theorists. Forming correct conspiracy theories is a critical and essential
part of understanding politics, international relations, and the justice system. Genuine
conspiracies between people are a fact of living in an industrialized, highly populated
globe. There are actual intelligence organizations, law enforcement agencies,
insurrectionist militias, and organized criminal enterprises which by their nature
create secrets, and clandestinely plan murders and arrests. We don't generally regard
them as spectacular, because you can read about most of the important (and publicly
disclosed) ones on Wikipedia.
Clearly, then, there are key diﬀerences between the regular conspiracy theorist, which
almost all of us are, and the cultural conception of a "conspiracy theorist". One
common diﬀerence is an implausible level of sophistication and ability assigned to the
schemers. When working in their near lives, people have an intuition about how many
people can be told about something salacious without it becoming public knowledge.
Even in circumstances where everyone is properly motivated and there are low
rewards for becoming an informant, like a middle school classroom, we understand
intuitively how hard it is to keep everyone from leaking information to the teacher. The
airquoted "conspiracy theorist" ﬁrst and foremost rejects their internal social
navigation sensors. Instead, in order to make their ideas plausible, they tend to see
intelligence oﬃcers who are really just bigger LARPers than the "conspiracy theorist"
as supernaturally competent and cooperative within their in-group.
A second thing the "conspiracy theorist" will do is assign demonic or otherworldly
values to large groups of people, lacking any backstory for why they seem to have
these strange motivations. Now, in real life, people can have very strange reasons for
their actions. I ﬁnd it hard to imagine that it'd be possible to successfully gather
nineteen people for the 9/11 terror attacks, and end up without a single person who'd
object and alert the FBI. But that's just a failure of my own imagination. There is a
huge amount of indoctrination, socialization, and child rearing before someone is
entrusted with a task like driving a plane into the pentagon - and on top of it the 9/11
hijackers were born into almost as diﬀerent a culture from mine as you could ﬁnd.
Sacriﬁcing yourself and thousands of others in the name of God is not an implausible
story, given the enormous amount of brainwashing that goes into preparing someone
for the role. It's just hard for me to empathize as some atheist American.
On the other hand, the "conspiracy theorist" will just call all government and business
leaders pedophiles. They will usually not go far enough to suppose an actual source
for these wildly dissimilar and almost universally abhorred preferences. They don't
claim (usually) that elites grew up in a diﬀerent culture where pedophilia is promoted
and instilled as a norm in youth. They'll just claim that - for some reason - those are
the people we tend to elect, and they also tend to be inhumanly good at trusting the
right people and at prisoners' dilemmas.
A third, and perhaps the primary, social signal that we use to label someone a
conspiracy theorist is that they are simply making outrageous seeming claims about
powerful (or imagined powerful) entities like the U.S. federal government. Most
people, probably quite reasonably, just take what they have been told about their

institutions their entire life as a baseline. If you ask them as they're walking down the
street, they probably won't be able to come up with principled objections to 9/11
truthers. They will reject it (rightly or wrongly) because they need to go to work, and
it's simply not in the category of things they're willing to believe.
It's of course still easy to make fun of the Alex Jones tier conspiracy theories. But if
we're being honest, it's still really hard for any regular person to model opaque
organizations like their local police department, their district attorney's oﬃce, the FBI,
the NSA, the state department, or Congress. Most people believe silly things about
one or more of the above institutions, and I think they believe them simply because
they do not have the tools equipped to understand those organizations. Some of this
is due to a lack of knowledge about what these organizations do and what their
internal politics are. Some of this is due to the fact it's socially encouraged to have a
non-sensibly cynical attitude when it comes to clandestine organizations, lest we be
accused of being too naive by our wizened and grizzled friends. But a lot of it is just
because, by default, we no longer get to use the operationally important reasoning for
understanding the behavior of people we actually know when trying to understand the
behavior of clandestine organizations. Instead we feel free to shift into far-mode
thinking, and posit relationships and arrangements that do not actually occur in the
wild. The things our theories say about us and let us get to believe become more
important than their predictive value. We don't actually see any of these grand
coverups happen, but it's cool to imagine they do, especially when we get to imagine
our political enemies doing it. Sometimes the long downtime between regime changes
are so boring that it's easier and more exciting to just assume it's happening all the
time, everywhere, right out of sight.
How can rationalists prevent themselves from making these mistakes? There is one
strong trick I know of and it's actually quite powerful, if you have the intellectual
honesty for it. First, learn how your local criminal organizations, justice system,
political organs, and intelligence agencies work, so that you have a solid
understanding of the institutions you're trying to model. Easier said than done, I know,
but that's the ﬁrst part of modeling any institution or population well. You don't need
to know everything, just enough to understand where risks to parties involved actually
come from. 
Let's take the business of drug dealing for example, where due to your research you
ﬁnd the vast majority of people are caught via compelled police informants. Now
imagine you're the founder of the conspiracy to sell drugs. How would you attempt to
make money selling drugs, if you actually didn't want to be looking at 30 to life after
ﬁve years of median income? What risks would you be willing to take and why? How
would you gather the introductions necessary to order large quantities of drugs
without running into a police oﬃcer or informant ﬁrst? How would you distribute
them? Would you try to sell them yourself? Via other dealers who you'd have to
recruit? Would you try to just mule the drugs and not distribute? Is it really a good
idea to try to bribe a powerful state senator with no incentive to keep quiet if caught,
and little reason to risk his position for drug money anyways? 
This hypothetical planning technique doesn't just work because it prevents you from
assigning implausible motives or actions to these shadowy people. It also works
because these shadowy people, themselves, are often professional LARPers. The
stupid mistakes you make coming up with a plan to sell drugs are going to be very far
from the stupidest mistakes drug dealers have ever made, because there are no
apprenticeships for drug dealers. Most of their tradecraft is just made up on the ﬂy,
not an insigniﬁcant amount gathered from impressions gained in TV shows and

movies. In fact, when media depictions of criminal organizations like the movie The
Godfather become extremely popular, a half a decade later there are often accounts
from informants about how kingpins began to adopt the mannerisms and speech
patterns of the characters they saw in the movie theater.  
To a lesser extent, this also applies to longstanding government bureaucracies like the
FBI and CIA - which are, in fact, bumbling government bureaucracies, and, for the
most part, are not nearly as eﬀective at espionage or crime deterrence as Google is at
search. These political organs act the way they act because of political and historical
happenstance, not because they out-competed their peers. It is understandably more
diﬃcult to model them correctly, because they hold private information, are
sometimes staﬀed by smart people, and are much more complicated entities than a
typical drug cartel. However, this works both ways - the more organized and well-
documented the institution, the more you can beneﬁt by reading about their history
from insiders and historians.
The CIA has some terminology it uses to explain why people give state secrets to an
enemy government, called MICE. It happens to be broadly applicable to a lot of
conspiratorial motivation, and not just the motivations of spies. The acronym stands
for Money, Ideology, Coercion, and Ego. Those ﬁrst two reasons for a conspiracy are
self explanatory - they make money, or they believe in what their doing for political or
religious reasons. In espionage, the 'C' usually refers to blackmail (often by
threatening to expose the information the agent has already passed on to their home
government). In cases of criminal informants, it's threats of jail time for charges the
prosecutor is willing to drop if the criminal helps arrest co-conspirators. The fourth is
perhaps the most obvious to people who are thinking clearly, and yet one the
"conspiracy theorist" will seldom acknowledge at all. Can you guess it? Have you
really attempted to put yourself honestly in the shoes of a conspirator?
It's because conspiracy is cool! On some level, getting away with crimes or plots
makes the average conspirator feel good about themselves, and not just because
they've made money or advanced their political ambitions. They feel powerful,
intelligent, and sophisticated. This is why would-be serial killers feel embarrassed if
they get caught after a single murder, and would rather attempt to falsely claim
dozens of other murders to look accomplished than leave a possibility of parole. Sure,
the [CIA oﬃcer] might be [interned at ADX Florence for the rest of their life over some
money they can't even really use without looking incredibly suspicious]. In the
meantime though, the conspirator get to experience the thrill of being an actual
spy/drug dealer/corrupt cop! The conspirator is a real person - just as incapable of
keeping a secret as the rest of us - and also capable of doing something like take
bribes mostly because he is bored and wants his life to be more cinematic. 
Jeﬀrey Epstein is not Neo from the Matrix, or John Wick from John Wick. He did not live
in an alternate shadow universe where logic and reason do not apply. He was a rich
and a proliﬁc sex oﬀender. Everything that happened to and around him has a real
and consistent mechanical explanation, whether we are capable of understanding the
details or not. 
There are basically two mysteries regarding Jeﬀrey Epstein - the ﬁrst is how he died,
and the second is how he managed to get the plea bargain wherein he served twelve
months in para-prison for creating a network of dozens of underage prostitutes.

I have little insight to give on the ﬁrst mystery, which I think is actually the less
enlightening one. Jeﬀrey Epstein probably killed himself. 
Every opinion (I can ﬁnd) given by people with actual private knowledge of or
investigating his death, from correctional oﬃcers, law enforcement, to neighboring
inmates, says he killed himself. The FBI and the Oﬃce of the Inspector General both
extensively investigated his death, up to producing a 15-page psychological report
reconstructing the motives for his suicide.
You are probably aware of the details of his death that make it seem suspicious, such
as the camera malfunction in front of his cell, the guards not following protocol, and
the very few suicides at the prison prior to his death (not one for 21 years). Here I'll
make some points you may not have heard:
The base rate of cameras in government buildings not working is high.
The cameras in front of his cell were torn apart by the FBI for analysis and
apparently, there was no evidence of tampering.
Epstein had his lawyers draft his will two days before he died.
The other cameras adjacent to his cell were working. No one entered the area he
was housed the night he died. The Attorney General, the highest ranking law
enforcement oﬃcial in the country, personally reviewed the footage surrounding
Epstein's prison block to conﬁrm this for himself. This is probably the most
damning evidence because it means one of the other seven inmates in Epsteins'
prison tier may have basically had to escape their cell during night hours and
murder him, without being noticed by any other inmates.
Fundamentally, lots of people who are arrested have dirt on other criminals.
Some 10-15% of our prison population is comprised of drug traﬃckers, who
almost always possess the opportunity to lower their sentence by becoming an
informant. It is suspicious that Epstein died the way he did at all, but not
particularly suspicious that he was also a well connected criminal. The MCC itself
has housed El Chapo, Paul Manafort, John Gotti, Michael D'Amico, Bernie Madoﬀ,
and several Al Qaeda operatives while they awaited trial. All of these people
were either capable of, or currently in the middle of, providing incriminating
information against people signiﬁcantly more well-equipped to murder inmates
than Alan Dershowitz. None of them were prophylactically murdered, probably
because our maximum security jails are designed to prevent that sort of thing
from happening.
So here is the most plausible murder scenario I can come up with:
1. A co-conspirator ﬁnds out the tier of the prison in which Epstein was housed,
and compiles information on the other 7 cellmates, and selects someone willing
to murder him.
2. They then take the extraordinary risk of approaching that person and giving
them the means and motive to go along with this murder plot. I want to
underscore how hard this is. Prison calls/visits are heavily monitored, and so you
might have to not only trust that this person won't immediately rat you out to
get out of the MCC, but also trust that a correctional oﬃcer or lawyer you're
using to deliver the message will go along with the plot. And few rational people
are willing to risk life in prison for murder conspiracy so they don't have to do
what would maybe be seven years after a plea bargain for statuatory rape.
3. That inmate or maybe the second recruited correctional oﬃcer disables the
cameras in front of Epstein's cell without leaving any indication of tampering.

4. The prisoner-ninja then breaks out of their cell at 3:00 AM, then breaks into
Epstein's cell without alerting him or causing him to scream for help, chokes him
to death neatly enough for a medical examiner to pronounce him dead by
suicide (no thrashing around by Epstein in a way that would leave bruises or
undeniable evidence), then re-lock both cells and return by morning, all without
leaving any evidence of this assassination for the FBI or correctional oﬃcers, or
getting witnessed by the other inmates in the same tier, or getting caught on
the adjacent cameras.
Now, I'm only 75% certain he wasn't killed. Maybe there's some other scenario I'm not
thinking of that ﬁts the crime. Maybe I underestimate the ruthlessness and
sophistication of the parties that Epstein was aﬃliated with. Maybe the FBI has
uncovered evidence of a murder and is being unusually good at practicing discrete
investigation. I will say this - in the 25% scenario he was killed, I think we'll have a
75% chance of learning how in the future. I seem to be the only person on the planet
who believes a murder plot this complicated can't go uncovered for long. 
But from the facts I have in front of me today, organizing his death and getting away
with it really does sound basically impossible. At least it sounds like a lot of work. Real
sex oﬀenders or turned LEO just take their retirement savings and fuck oﬀ to Guam at
some point, or do nothing and pray to God that he doesn't mention anything.
That leaves the second mystery. How did Jeﬀrey Epstein get 12 months in prison along
with 12 hours a day of "work release" for raping dozens of underage girls? 
He was probably a CIA agent.
Of course, a CIA agent isn't (usually) someone who works at the CIA. In espionage
they use really confusing terminology, wherein an "oﬃcer" is someone who works for
an intelligence agency and an "agent" is someone who passes along information. If
you talk to someone who works for the CIA and refer to them as an "intelligence
agent", they might nervously smile before correcting you that an intelligence agent
would be someone who spied on the CIA for a foreign government. A "double-agent",
then, is a "fake" spy, someone who is believed to be a spy for Agency A in Agency B,
but is actually feeding Agency A misinformation on Agency B operations on behalf of
Agency B. Much of the time double agents are regular agents who were caught,
tortured or threatened with jailtime, and then forced by their home countries to act as
double agents. 
Contrary to popular belief, attempting to cultivate genuine "agents" and process their
information is 97.5% of what the Central Intelligence Agency does. They're also the
designated clandestine services arm of the U.S. government, so it's not all they do,
but what they and other intelligence agencies around the world primarily do is play rat
handler. Their job is to cultivate and analyze the reports of people with privileged
information about the plans and military operations of other governments, and then
they sit there looking over those reports a hundred times to see if they spot any
terrorists within the margins. When analysts ﬁnd something interesting, they pass it
up to the White House and the State Department decides if/how SEALs need to be
deployed. But aside from a hundred or two hundred members of its Special Activities
Center, the CIA's job is to collect information.
Epstein was an intelligence agent because as a founder of the consulting ﬁrm
Intercontinental Assets Group, which assisted clients such as Adnan Khashoggi in

recovering stolen money from fraudulent brokers and lawyers, he represented an
almost perfect source of intelligence. One could not imagine a better opportunity for
an intelligence oﬃcer, in the abstract. Unlike most spies, he was already an American.
The people around him (aside from the ones he raped) uniformly described him as
charismatic and sociable - Epstein practically got oﬀ on being well connected. And his
actual job was to travel all over the world and track down the assets of scores of
powerful people, whose connections he had a habit of maintaining for the rest of his
life. There is no reason one can ﬁnd without the beneﬁt of hindsight why American
intelligence services would refuse to accept his help, and they certainly accept help
from people worse than Epstein in the course of doing their job.
That's not why I claim he was an intelligence agent. The ﬁrst reason I know that he
was an intelligence agent is because, at least according to Evening Standard, Epstein
literally bragged about being an intelligence agent to his friends while he was spying
on behalf of the United States. Not something you'd typically expect someone
committing capital crimes in foreign countries to do, unless you remembered that
spies are sometimes, like Epstein, actual megalomaniacs who can't wait to tell
acquaintances about the whole spy thing. The second reason I know this is because
the prosecutor in Epstein's ﬁrst trial seems to have deﬁnitively stated during his
Trump transition interviews that the reason he gave Epstein such a nice plea deal was
because the Department of Defense interceded on his behalf. He was later oﬀered a
chance to rebut this in front of reporters and instead stated an extraordinary non-
denial denial:
Reporter from AP: "Were you ever made aware that Jeﬀrey Epstein was an
intelligence asset of some sort?"
Acosta: "So there has been reporting to that eﬀect and let me say, there's been
reporting to a lot of eﬀects in this case, not just now but over the years and,
again, I would hesitant to take this reporting as fact. This was a case that was
brought by our oﬃce, it was brought based on the facts and I look at the reporting
and others, I can't address it directly because of our guidelines, but I can tell you
that a lot of reporting is going down rabbit holes."
Perhaps there is some sort of guideline preventing him from speaking about this, but I
have not heard of it. District Attorneys and the FBI publicly announce people were
informants all of the time, as long as the people they're prosecuting are already
prosecuted. They certainly don't swear an oath not to comment on the subject even in
the event of the persons' death.
While it's uncommon for a career criminal like Epstein to give information to an
intelligence agency rather than law enforcement, it's standard enough procedure.
Acosta was probably not fazed by the ask to drop charges in response to claims that
Epstein had been a high-level informant. Why? 
Cop shows are ﬁlled with wild chess matches between criminal masterminds heading
vast conspiracies and (basically lone) law enforcement oﬃcials. Unfortunately in real
life there are only two sureﬁre ways to prove criminal conspiracies and attack criminal
organizations that have already begun to sprawl. The ﬁrst is to listen to the
conspirators talk to each other as they plan out the conspiracy. Any conspiracy,
whether its a terrorist network, drug cartel, or burglary ring, needs its members to
coordinate with one another. Otherwise, its regular boring crime. 

Sometimes bugs and communication intercepts are impossible. It's relatively easy for
a competent group of U.S. citizens to talk to each other without U.S. law enforcement
listening, allowing for some simple but aggravating precautions. If everyone involved
agrees never to talk indoors or near a phone, and instead walk two miles in a random
direction from whatever building's nearby while they discuss their criminal activity,
that's enough for 99% of U.S. organized crime to communicate without worry.
The second sureﬁre way to attack conspiracies is by performing a memory dump on
the people involved in them. Now, (thankfully) world governments haven't invented
the brain scanner. This means that lots of conspiracies must be dismantled by
accepting the testimony or leads to incriminating information from a defecting
member. And so the only way a government can continue to exist and prevent
insurrections, sans torture, is if it maintains a credible pledge to give leniency to
criminals in exchange for cooperating. Under extreme circumstances, this leniency
covers serial murder. Exerting powerful coercive pressure on insurrectionists, in some
form or fashion, to inform on their co-conspirators, is a requirement if you want your
government to last more than twelve months. It's only by this system that
governments can prevent most wannabe kingpins from coordinating with more than
three or four serious felons before running an unacceptable risk of someone getting
caught for a "side hustle" and then snitching.
People with worse crimes than Epstein are regularly given immunity or greatly
reduced sentences for this. Samuel Gravano admitted to killing or being directly
involved in the deaths of nearly twenty people - more than most serial killers - and he
currently makes candid podcasts on YouTube about his time as a maﬁoso, because he
was critical witness against a large ongoing criminal organization. You can complain
that giving amnesty is immoral or that it creates "bad incentives" or that it
encourages corruption, and attempt to vote politicians in to dismantle it, but your
elected oﬃcials are highly incentivized to dismantle plots to murder elected oﬃcials. A
stable world power like the United States has to be able to, on occasion, turn people
that are literally willing to die in the process of accomplishing their goals. 
I don't know what information Jeﬀrey Epstein gave the U.S. government in exchange
for an intelligence oﬃcer interceding on his behalf, but since all that his handler did
was tell Acosta to "leave him alone", I don't think it needed to be much. 
Does that mean Epstein didn't or wouldn't try to lever his wealth and inﬂuence? Not at
all! He certainly poured an enormous amount of money on an army of lawyers for the
case, so that he'd be in the strongest possible position to negotiate his fake sentence.
 He hired Alan Dershowitz, someone he'd previously traﬃcked underage women to, as
part of his defense team (and therefore, by implication, blackmail him into doing a
swell job on the charges). He sent private investigators to regularly harass and
intimidate potential witnesses during and after the trial. If you were a psychopath
facing thirty years in prison, would you let the one reference from CIA John be the only
thing keeping you free?
I think speculating like this about world events and opaque organizations is healthy
and practical. Taken at face value, one of the most famous ﬁndings of the Good
Judgement project is that regular people have enough information to do it. In fact, I'd
go as far as saying that for a lot of you, making bets or pseudo-bets like I just gave
above probably represents a pretty well fun+learning optimized method to test your
rationality:

Predicting conspiracies and future evidence requires you to estimate
probabilities for discrete events and in low-information settings, much more
analogous to the scenarios you might run into in real life than predicting
someone's net worth.
Doing necessary research about tradecraft or international relations, for many, is
much more interesting than the other things that aren't that.
A lot of people on this website are under the age of thirty. If you expect to live to
70-80 years, that means you're going to be alive in 2080. It is diﬃcult to know
what the political situation of your country is going to look like in forty or ﬁfty
years. Sometimes conspirators win, and it tends to catch people oﬀ guard. It
always sounds extreme to people living in currently peaceful nations, but
understanding how and why countries undergo large-scale political change may
save your life, or the lives of your family members.
If you vote for someone in local or national government, you should probably
know what it is that person does and what their motivations are.
If it gets enough interest, I'll make this post the ﬁrst in a sequence about the push and
pull between law enforcement and organized criminal conspiracies. As a pedagogical
tool (and for fun) we'll design a generic paramilitary organization for subverting U.S.
government laws, and perhaps overthrowing the U.S. Hopefully, the sequence will
improve your ability to accurately predict the actions and scope of our public safety
institutions - not just by following the broad strokes of some ideology, but by
mechanically understanding their behaviors.

Addendum: A non-magical
explanation of Jeﬀrey Epstein
Around seven months ago I wrote the post "a non-magical explanation of Jeﬀrey
Epstein". In it, I make the argument that Jeﬀrey Epstein did actually kill himself and
that he was a CIA agent. I reach that conclusion mostly by drawing on some
Conspiracy Theory and doing some light research. 
I am mostly satisﬁed with most of the reasoning I did throughout the post, and in
particular my conclusion that Epstein was a high level informant for American
intelligence services. However, over time I became less satisﬁed with my conclusion
about Epstein's death. The paradox of the Epstein case is that the circumstances of
his death seem so organized, and yet succeeding investigative details and a nuanced
understanding of the parties involved seem to completely rule out foul play. It's quite
literally a locked room murder story.
Problems with the murder hypothesis
Impracticality, lack of forensic evidence, lack of witnesses
Multiple reviewers of footage from that night, including the Attorney General at the
time, claimed related cameras around Epstein's cell showed no one exiting or entering
the block he was in. I am satisﬁed in assuming that not all of the parties who veriﬁed
this made a mistake or are secretly controlled by some puppet-master behind the
scenes. This means Epstein would have to be killed by someone in his housing block
who escaped their cell throughout the night, broke into Epstein's cell without any
witnesses, and then strangled him to death without leaving any obvious and
unmistakable evidence of a struggle for the coroner, and this seems totally
implausible. Epstein didn't yell as his neighboring inmate sat there picking the lock?
Get blood and skin under his ﬁngernails? Do literally anything while this degenerate
ninja-inmate tied his bedsheets around his neck? None of the other inmates thought
to mention this if that's what happened, even after it was clear there was a coverup
and they might be able to swing immunity out of it?
Epstein's will & foreknowledge of his death
Epstein clearly knew when he was going to die, because he drafted and signed a will
just two days before it happened. You can also make up murder stories where he
knows this, but one would think if he had advance warning Epstein would have been
the type of person to cause maximum damage to his killers by explicitly telling people
who he believed was going to kill him and why.
Lack of viable suspects
I don't think Epstein's sex abuse victims have accused anyone with either the motive
or means to organize a high-security jailhouse murder regardless of the particular
circumstances. This pretty much leaves the CIA, or some random unknown third party
that wanted him dead for something maybe unrelated to raping children.

I say motive because even if everything accused about any single one of the
people ﬁngered in the Epstein scandal were proven in a court of law, they still
wouldn't be facing life in prison for murder. It's hard to imagine how someone
sane could see killing Epstein as a rational solution to their relatively minor legal
problems without the beneﬁt of hindsight. Even if you were a sociopath, why
would you risk getting life without parole for assassinating a state's witness so
you could avoid ﬁve years in prison after a plea bargain for statuatory rape?
I say means because organizing the murder of potential witnesses is the type of
thing that only makes sense if you already have trusted confederates you can
task. If you are a major drug dealer, and you have ﬁve direct underlings, and
one of them goes to jail and looks like they're going to testify against you, you
can task one of the remaining four people with organizing a hit because you're
already trusting that person in the course of your job and thus not taking on
much additional risk. But if you don't have those pre-existing relationships then
trying to get someone or a group of people to cooperate in killing a potential
witness is, at best, replacing one potential witness with another potential
witness. None of the Known Quantities (aside from hypothetically the CIA I
guess) seem to be in possession of existing contacts useful in ameliorating this
dilemma. 
(Not to mention the fact that if you haven't already arranged murders
before, you might think "damn, maybe I'll fuck this up and dig myself into
an even deeper hole than I already have.")
My (admittedly limited) vision into how the CIA is structured and its oﬃcers
are incentivized says that the people inside the CIA who would have any
motive to murder Epstein would not be able to, in practice, use workplace
resources to illegally assassinate an American citizen. 
If I am very very very wrong and the CIA really has that little internal
oversight over the Special Activities Division kill button and our
intelligence agencies are that dirty, then the people involved
probably have no reason to risk escalating attention by murdering
Epstein anyways because in most of these alternate universes they
don't face repercussions for cultivating him as an agent. You probably
either live in a world where your intelligence agencies have impunity
or a world where they have to organize assassinations of key ﬁgures;
it less sense to me that a CIA would be both capable of assassinating
Epstein AND scared of him testifying in court against it.
No in-progress plea bargain at Epstein's time of death 
If Epstein still had incriminating information on other people he thought he could
leverage for a better sentence, he would have been using it, and he would have been
completely safe. 
Epstein was a wall street executive with zero sense of honor. He would
absolutely have been ratting on co-conspirators if he thought it was something
he could do to get out of hard time, and would have started negotiating such a
plea well before he died instead of sitting in jail crying about his living
conditions. He did this exact thing as a pre-emptive strike on a ﬁnance partner
who helped him steal buckets of money in the 90s, before he was even indicted,
just to make sure the other guy didn't get the opportunity to do it to him ﬁrst. 
This would have been a major part of the story if it were true. A bunch of people
would have known it was happening, including his lawyers who have failed thus
far to mention such a plea or which people, if any, he was set to testify against.

Epstein would have faced little to no threat of direct reprisal for such testimony.
WITSEC has a literal 100% success rate at protecting informants from the worst
criminal organizations in the world. Movies and television shows have lied to you
about this, because a 100% success rate WITSEC makes for a very uncompelling
story, and is anti-fun and anti-edgy to the point that people resist believing it.
It turns out that criminals, just like everyone else, have a coordination
problem in punishing defectors. Even perennial institutions like the
American Maﬁa with speciﬁc public reputations to uphold are typically lax
about assassinating oathbreakers when they didn't hurt the speciﬁc regime
of the people currently in charge. Criminals want informants to die in
general, they don't have the motivation to personally go through the
trouble and risk of enforcing underworld justice themselves, unless those
people are actively putting guys from their organization in particular in jail.
Murdering people is very expensive.
Please read this or another book on WITSEC before you start to quibble
with me about the 100% success rate. Yes, there have been, in extremely
rare circumstances, people who viciously assault civilians or start to move
large amounts of drugs again after getting into the program, and then get
kicked out of WITSEC after that as per their agreement, and then go back
to their old neighborhoods against the advice of sane people and get hurt.
If you want to use this to say Epstein would have been in danger, then go
ahead and select a speciﬁc actual reference example of this happening so
that we can debate whether or not that "exception" was the result of
covert actions taken by people outside the program who wanted them
dead, or that Epstein would have been forced to make the same mistakes.
I say "100% success rate" because WITSEC has been 100% successful at
doing the thing Epstein would need it to do, and the thing a reasonable
person would want it to do, not because it's able to magically sedate every
pathologically criminal psychopath with a death wish.
Low likelihood of FBI Corruption
Finally, as people pointed out in the comments of the post, I do in fact have a strong
opinion that the parties that investigated Epstein's death, namely the FBI, are and
were generally habitually honest in the relevant sense. Explaining the whole story
behind why I believe this, even in spite of the circumstances, would take several posts
to convey suﬃciently for those that don't want to hear it, but the cliﬀ-notes are:
There have been exceptionally few apparent cases of corrupt FBI oﬃcers in the
last ﬁfty years. And if it were possible and happened, I do in fact expect there
would be more apparent cases. Substantiating that second sentence is one of
the things that would take a lot of prep work.
Those corrupt agents, predictably, had a limited ability to actually tamper
with evidence. Tampering with evidence is really dangerous! They were
instead suspected of giving information to criminals about things like
potential informants or arrests, which is easy enough to do in private if the
person you're giving information to is your CI.
In the two to four serious possible cases of organized crime or individual
criminals corrupting FBI agents I'm aware of, it was contained to speciﬁc
agents. There was not a culture of dishonesty among a task force that
might indicate a broader problem, and the rest of the people on the
corrupt agents' team were generally diligent in raising advance concerns.

I have reasons to believe that the "teammates noticing and raising
the alarm" part is not a selection eﬀect and is in fact unusual for
cases of corruption in law enforcement. Contrast this with the typical
case of corruption in American local law enforcement where bad
behavior often turns out to be endemic or systematically overlooked
by the rest of the department.
A reviewer remarks that the reaction to this evidence could be
"Look at other law enforcement bodies! They're so often
corrupt - why not just believe the FBI has the resources to hide
it really well?" My point is that the examples we have of FBI
corruption seem systematically dissimilar to the examples we
have of widespread corruption in other departments, in a way
that implies they are edge cases. It's true that speciﬁc
instances of local police departments being systematically,
criminally corrupt ought to increase your prior that the FBI is
compromised too. If those instances seemed so emblematic I
were starting with a prior of near certainty, I might start to
reason that the FBI were just extraordinarily good at coverups.
But I don't actually think such a prior is justiﬁed, and while the
FBI does have, say, a larger budget than local departments,
those resources are earmarked for law enforcement and are not
obviously useful for covering up their own corrupt behavior.
FBI agents basically lack extrinsic motivation to become de novo corrupt, mostly
by design.
FBI agents are already paid fairly well, in status as well as money. They
make solidly above median income and get a position inside America's
most elite crime ﬁghting agency, and these positions are competed for and
treasured very intensely even if you personally wouldn't value one. A
substantial proportion of women ﬁnd physically ﬁt elite lawmen attractive.
They have sex.
The beneﬁts of accepting bribes in a ﬁrst world country, as a police oﬃcer
or a district attorney, are really quite small. While I respect that others may
have diﬀerent utility functions, it seems to me like only extraordinarily
stupid or self-destructive people inside American law enforcement do it,
regardless of morals. Even a 5% risk of ruining your career and going to jail
for ﬁve years is probably not worth tolerating for monthly payments you
cannot actually use to buy a house. And an agent accepting money from a
typical professional or habitual criminal stands much more than a 5%
chance of getting caught.
One way you can tell bribes are not much of a motivator is the fact
that some of the most cited cases of possible FBI corruption did not
even involve bribes! If you believe Lindley Devecchio did aid Greg
Scarpa, he apparently did it mostly because it made him feel cool, or
because he thought Scarpa's continued ability to work for him as an
informant might help him boost prestige among coworkers.
The FBI's recruitment process is very good at ﬁltering out people likeliest
to disregard their incentives and become de novo corrupt anyways for
reasons like pathological risk-taking. This is a primary goal of their
screening and they go over and beyond by ﬁltering out many who you
would probably say are ﬁne but seem even slightly on paper like they'd be
interested in taking such risks.
Corruption is a self-fulﬁlling prophecy, but also a self-refuting prophecy, and the
prevalence of such corruption scales with common knowledge. The FBI has a
general reputation among organized crime of being highly resistant to blackmail

and bribes. So gangs and vice networks tend to stick to turning local law
enforcement when they decide that's advantageous, and so the FBI becomes
seen as even less corrupt, in a virtuous cycle. This phenomenon is part of why
there's a gulf between countries that have ubiquitous corruption by
patrolmen/traﬃc cops and countries where very few people pay any bribes on a
regular basis.
The FBI is a huge organization. The cases where FBI agents have been
corrupted were cases where there was a speciﬁc team investigating particular
groups of people, like "Boston area crime bosses", for long periods of time, who
could actually inﬂuence the progress of those investigations long term. Why
would the mysterious third party's random mole, if they had one, be particularly
likely to be assigned to the investigation of Epstein's death? Or even be in a
position to get themselves assigned to that investigation if that were possible?
Problems with the naive suicide hypothesis
The death rates inside these prisons is extremely low. How come the ﬁrst person
in this prison that managed to kill themselves in this prison in so many years
happened to be as high proﬁle as Epstein? Lots of people in that jail want to die.
How on earth do these cameras speciﬁcally along his cell go out at the same
time as Epstein is hanging himself? Even if this happens all the time it's gotta be
a hundred, maybe a thousand to one that it happens for those speciﬁc cameras
on that day.
How come the guards violated protocol that night by not checking on Epstein
every thirty minutes, and falsiﬁed records to say they did? If your hypothesis is
that the guards were lazy or that this prison's security was lax, why does that
hypothesis happen to be the case in this particular prison? Also, why does this
particular prison seem to be so otherwise successful at preventing suicides of
people in similar situations as Epstein?
The third option
So my opinions of both hypotheses were fairly low. I settled this by saying that the
murder hypothesis is stupider than the naive suicide hypothesis, and went the latter.
The justiﬁcation in my head was something like: "The fact that this case was brought
to my attention meant that it was a low-probability event anyways, and so it's not
really that odd that it's so strange."
I think that was a mistake, possibly a generalizable mistake to learn from. Instead of
saying "I am really not sure what happened, but X is more likely than Y", I picked one
and forgot or didn't realize there could be alternative explanations. If both of your
theories seem like million-to-one events, they're probably both wrong and you're
making a mistake in concluding they're the only available options. I have now come
up with a third hypothesis, which I guess you could say is technically covered by #2: 
Epstein paid correctional oﬃcers to let him die. The cameras weren't working and/or
the guards failed to check on him that night, because Epstein explicitly bribed
someone(s) to disable those cameras and/or look the other way.  The base rate of
suicide in the MCC correctional facility is low because generally its precautions work to
prevent suicide attempts. 

Epstein took deliberate action to ensure they didn't. He did so partly to save himself a
life in prison, but also as part of a plan to spite his victims. His suicide denied them
both the satisfaction of a trial and complicated access to any resources which his will
would pour into an inaccessible private trust. That will, by the way, seemed
deliberately designed to most observers to minimize the government's ability to
access his fortune or get him to pay restitution in the event of his death.
I know this seems like the kind of wild theory you say you believe in an essay because
it's thought provoking. This is what I actually believe; it's my 85% hypothesis. It's the
only story that makes sense; it explains Epstein's behavior, the incidentally poor
security, why there was nobody going in or out of the housing blocks and no evidence
of a struggle, and doesn't propose some wide ranging conspiracy across multiple
government departments that we would already probably know about. It's the only
way he could be expected to kill himself inside that prison in the ﬁrst place if he did. It
also explains why this plot wasn't uncovered: because there are like, three people that
would have to know about it, not even including Epstein's lawyers. Epstein could have
just made up a sob-story and convinced a correctional oﬃcer to look the other way
himself, or promised the oﬃcer his lawyers would pay them after the fact, and then
didn't, because arranging that would be more complicated and time consuming.
And I'll admit, even to the hit of my own credibility, that I love this theory because it's
so... Anticlimactic? Left-ﬁeld? No one wants to believe this story, except pedantic
weirdos like me. It's so satisfyingly unsatisfying. You don't ﬁgure this out by imbuing
some grand intentionality to the story or thematic signiﬁcance to the people involved.
You get it by following all the billiard balls really closely and paying attention to all of
the uninteresting details and seeing what incidental property emerges. And once
you're done you're usually left without some obvious message because these people
aren't living their lives deliberately trying to convey some grand story about
corruption. Those lessons are there, but they're not there as part of a curriculum
designed to teach them to you. Reality is irregular and unrepentingly insistent on
taking into account stupid little details.

Don't take the organizational chart
literally
"Do you know how much power I'd have to give up to be President?" - Lex Luthor
The CIA, like all intelligence agencies, spends much of its time managing and creating
spies. Managing and creating spies is its primary job, and though it's also the
clandestine operations arm of the U.S. government, the vast majority of employees at
the CIA are devoting to analysis or acquisition of information from these "human
intelligence" sources. 
For ﬁeld oﬃcers in particular, creating your ﬁrst spy is a very signiﬁcant career
milestone. If a CIA oﬃcer is unable to accomplish this after being trained for it and
spending a few years in a foreign country, they'll probably have to pick a diﬀerent job.
So let's imagine that newly trained ﬁeld oﬃcer is you. Who would be your ideal
informant? Who would you want to ﬂip, if you could ﬂip anybody in the world?
This is an important exercise. Most of the time you won't be able to just arrange a
series of private meetings with people of real stature, like the head of a foreign
military, so you can convince them to betray their country. However, it's not unheard
of that an oﬃcer turns someone of small stature, say an analyst at the ISF, and that
person later gets heavily promoted. Perhaps because they got help from a Certain
Intelligence Agency.
A counter-terrorism analyst is privy to a lot of secret information throughout the
course of their job. But that analyst's commanding oﬃcer manages a bunch of
counter-terrorism analysts. So, getting your source that manager job means they're
going to be even more helpful. Right?
Well, maybe. It certainly sounds like it'd be impressive on a Wikipedia article or a spy
resume. But there are a few problems in practice with this strategy, some speciﬁc to
intelligence and some more general:
Spies often still have an odd sense of patriotism. If they become promoted really
heavily, they sometimes start to feel embarrassed on behalf of their country or
at least like they no longer need to talk to you, and demand to call the whole
relationship oﬀ.
An elevated rank tends to carry more scrutiny. Your spy might now be subject to
more intense surveillance by their host country, like a permanent security detail,
that may complicate your ability to communicate privately or provide them with
"gifts" they can actually use.
Most importantly for this conversation, your agent's boss might nominally
command the people privy to the details you want, but that doesn't mean they
have access to those details themselves, nor does it mean they can actually tell
their underlings to do what you want them to. Especially if what you want them
to do is punished by hanging.
There's a very signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the statements "almost everybody in the
Lebanese ISF is my agent", and "the person who is nominally in charge of the ISF is
my agent". There'd even be a diﬀerence between that and "almost everybody in the
ISF is my agent and knows who the other agents are and they cooperate with each
other". 

Having a working relationship with the major general of the ISF is certainly useful! It
will be really embarrassing for Lebanese security when that comes out in 25 years!
But it wouldn't obviously be more useful than was say, the KGB's working relationship
with Robert Hanssen. Robert Hanssen held the job of determining whether or not
Russian defectors were legitimate. His position as a background investigator meant
that he was able to, on more than one occasion, give Russia a complete list of
American spies, most of whom were eventually executed.
In many ways James Comey would have been a worse informant than Robert. James
Comey wouldn't actually have been able to get a list of all active spies, at least by
default. He'd be in a better position to goad, convince, or trick someone into breaking
information silos than you are, but that'd still be very risky for him, and you might not
have enough inﬂuence over him to get him to risk doing so even if he were your silent
partner. 
Sometimes when people argue that Elites are compromised or doing something
nefarious (which is often true), they make the mistake of assuming that just because
someone is in a leadership position over X, they can actually just tell everybody in X
to reject its mission charter and pursue some tertiary objective. This practice of
heedlessly adopting a simpliﬁed model of bureaucracy, where commanders losslessly
bucket brigade arbitrary orders down to foot soldiers, and foot soldiers losslessly
share information with command, like some horrible Java object schema, is called
"taking the org chart literally". It's an acceptable approximation when appropriately
applied, but it's also the central underlying fallacy of most (bad) conspiracy theories.
Even if he would like to have been, the person of Richard Nixon was most certainly not
equivalent to the federal government of the United States. He possessed real power,
and could and did make subversive orders of his underlings throughout the course of
his job. But it turns out people in his position generally don't have great
foreknowledge of which underlings are going to ﬁnd commands objectionable, or
which third parties are going to hear about those orders and try and blow the whistle,
or which evil minions will defect when threatened with prison time.
And those same limitations that apply to intelligence agencies when they try to
corrupt foreign law enforcement, also apply to attempts by civilians to do the same
thing. In a comment disagreeing with my recent post about the Epstein scandal,
where I make the argument that Epstein's death was a suicide, /u/Mitchell_Porter
writes:
Seriously, look at the chain of command. He was in a US federal prison. US federal
prisons are run by a branch of the Department of Justice. The head of the
Department of Justice was William Barr, whose father was a retired OSS agent who
gave Epstein his ﬁrst job.
I hope now you can anticipate my response to such an argument, even if I'm wrong.
When you explain away evidence gathered from multiple diﬀerent branches of the DOJ
and the actions of dozens of diﬀerent people by saying that "Bill Barr, the Attorney
General, was a member of the conspiracy", what you're really saying is that the
Attorney General and all of his relevant subordinates were members of the
conspiracy, either because they followed orders that were obviously illegal or because
they had some secondary reason to be in on it. Your theory is that Bill Barr or Bill
Barr's partner wanted Epstein dead, so he told the New York medical examiner to
mess up the autopsy, and the guards from the MCC to ignore his cell and remove his
cellmate, and the FBI agents investigating his death to ignore evidence of a struggle,

and someone in the Special Activities Center or the prison housing block to strangle
him. Or, even worse, Bill had to tell some other chain of persons who then conveyed
all of these orders second hand.
And I'm not saying that, in particular, "this is a very complicated plan and so it didn't
happen" is some knockdown argument. Conspiracy is just a special case of
coordination. People that say that you can't have a conspiracy "with too many people
involved" assume certain possibly incorrect things about how conspiracies scale. But
when you do assert that basically the entire U.S. government has collaborated on
murdering Epstein, make sure you're not making this particular mistake of pretending
the conspiracy involves less coordination than it really does, because you've identiﬁed
a suspicious person at the top of the org chart and have made the simplifying
assumption of totalitarian control.

