
Murphy's Quest
1. Murphy's Quest Ch 1: Exposure Therapy
2. Murphy's Quest Ch 2: Empiricism
3. Murphy's Quest Ch 3: Murphyjitsu
4. Murphy's Quest Ch 4: Noticing Confusion
5. Murphy's Quest Ch 5: Fail Gracefully
6. Murphy's Quest Ch 6: Perverse Incentives
7. Murphy's Quest Ch 7: Outside the Box
8. Murphy's Quest Ch 8: False Pentachotomy
9. Murphy's Quest Ch 9: Double Crux
10. Murphy's Quest Ch 10: Gears-Like Models
11. Murphy's Quest Ch 11: Resolve
12. Murphy's Quest Ch 12: Meta-Contrarianism
13. Murphy's Quest Ch 13: Existential Risk
14. Murphy's Quest Postmorterm

Murphy's Quest Ch 1: Exposure
Therapy
[Author's note: I noticed I've been trying to be too original in my ﬁction writing. This
story is trash and so am I.]
My name is Murphy. I've been preparing for this day since I was born.
I just woke up in a new world.
I'm standing in line while a mean-looking dwarf shouted a standard training prep talk
at us. Unity, courage, yadda, yadda, for the King!
Everything's just like I expected. I'm standing in a line with four other boys. We're
covered with basic brown adventurer frocks, with wood clubs and swords hanging at
our waists and small packs around our shoulders.
I can see stats ﬂoating over my arm like a fuzzy overlay. Basic noob stuﬀ.
NAME: Murphy
RACE: Human
LVL: 1
HP: 10/10
STR: 5
INT: 5
FTH: 5
AGI: 5
EQUIPPED: Wood Club (4 damage), Basic Rags.
My grin spreads from ear to ear. Thousands of hours of jRPGs all for this moment.
Prepare to bow to the wiles of Dark Warlock Emperor Murphy, plebs!
The drill sergeant dwarf is sending us on our ﬁrst training mission: a simple fetch
quest.
" - collect one thousand kobold ears."
Nani?!
—
There's no way out of the training grounds until we ﬁnish this ridiculous fetch quest.
Stone-faced Level 10 soldiers stand guard at every entrance.

After taking a hopeless tour of the camp, I decide to grind out the kobolds. How long
could this take?
Kobold Younglings spawn out of caves in the hillside, scurrying out every ﬁve minutes.
The other boys have already claimed the closest caves to camp. I take over the last
remaining one on the far side of the hill.
A Kobold Youngling (HP: 6/6) scrambles out of the cave and makes a run for it. I step
forward and smack it on the head. It doesn't die.
The mean little thing claws me across the forearm. I scramble back, and smack him
again. He falls over and disappears in a puﬀ, leaving behind a highlighted green ear. I
snap that into my pack.
I look down at my left arm.
Blood!?
I'm no good with real blood!
Uh oh.
—
I wake up that evening in my bunk. One of the other boys had dragged me away from
the spawn point before another Kobold appeared.
At least I killed the Kobold before passing out at the sight of blood.
The other boys all have 9 ears each. Kobold Scratch deals 1 damage, and you only
heal while sleeping, so we could only farm 9 a day. There's no way to avoid getting
scratched at least once per ﬁght.
I do a quick mental calculation. This is going to be a long 112 days.
On the bright side, missing a day didn't put me too far behind.
—
It's time to conquer my fear of blood.
I unravel my bandage all at once. The three long gashes look way worse than 1 point
of damage. Fresh blood is still oozing under the scab.
Uh oh.
—
It's another hour before I come to. The bandage is still unwrapped, but the blood has
mostly congealed. I'm hit by waves of nausea but maintain consciousness.
I grit my teeth and peel back one of the scabs. My ﬂesh is tender and pale
underneath.
This is the feeling of gaining experience.

I calm my hyperventilation by imagining a gold XP bar slowly ﬁlling up, and take
another peak.
Hey, it's not so bad.
Growing bolder, I wiggle the scab and try to pick more oﬀ. It's stuck. I keep pulling in
frustration.
"Yowww!"
The whole scab tears oﬀ at once. Blood spurts.
Uh oh.
—
The next morning, the boy on top bunk wakes me up for breakfast. I sit dazed, staring
at him blankly. I'm still clutching a long chunk of dried blood in my right hand.
You might ask: why haven't I mentioned the names of my fellow trainees? The reason
is: a Dark Warlock Emperor can only meet so many Named Characters in his quest to
ascension. They might be important later if I tell you their names now.
I'm saving Named Character slots for girls.
After shovelling down breakfast, the other boys go farm Kobolds and I retreat to the
barracks to continue overcoming my fear of blood.
This time, I'm more methodical. Sure, I puke a little in my mouth, and I'm covered in
cold sweat. But two hours later, I'm staring at blood ﬂowing out of an open wound
with only a slight dizziness.
Well, okay, the dizziness might just be blood loss.
—
It's day 2 of training, and there's not much to do. In the morning, we trainees go out
to the Kobold caves after breakfast and collect 9 ears. But then we're all scratched up
at 1/10 HP. We spend the rest of the day chatting.
I expect the other boys to be suspicious that I don't know jack shit, so I spin them a
tale about foreign-born orphan on a slave ship that ran aground, only survivor yadda
yadda. They look at me quizzically.
"What's a ship?"
Apparently there aren't oceans in this world.
Anyhow, now they just think I'm crazy. It's probably for the best.
Turns out we're in a Church-sponsored city-state called Beltine and we're training to
join the Alliance battlefront against the Demon King. Turns out every single one of
these boys is a poor orphan who wants to be the next Ordained Hero. When they open
their mouths, all I hear is *trope trope trope*.
I have to get out of here!

Murphy's Quest Ch 2: Empiricism
How did the cunning Dark Warlock Emperor Murphy solve the Thousand Kobold
Challenge?
I ask my bunkmate in the morning to camp a spawn point together. My thinking: if we
can both hit the Kobold before he gets a chance to attack, we won't take damage.
That way we can grind all day.
Of course I'm not ready to grant my bunkmate Named Character status. He'll have to
earn it.
He agrees to give it a try. So we're squatting together around a Kobold cave, and my
thighs cramp but I don't want to look like a wimp. These other boys must have grown
up on manual labor. I wonder if they also have STR: 5?
The ﬁrst Kobold that spawns takes a hard left when he sees us. We step forward in
unison, but my bunkmate is farther away and hits him late. The Kobold scratches me
right before he dies.
The next one is the same, and the next one.
No matter how closely we time our attacks, the scrawny little rats always get a Kobold
Scratch in right in between.
I hang my head. There's only one possible conclusion...
Combat is turn-based?!
—
No way is the future Dark Warlock Emperor staying here to smack Kobolds for another
hundred days.
I sit around dawdling all afternoon with the other trainees. They seem to be bonding
and enjoying themselves. Must feel like a vacation for them.
Suddenly, I have a bright idea. I'll dual wield clubs! That'll kill the Kobolds in one hit.
My bunkmate lets me borrow his club. I pick up my own in my right hand, and grab his
in my left.
It won't budge.
Really?
If I drop my club, I can pick up his in my left hand. Somehow as soon as I pick one up
with one hand, the other becomes too heavy to lift. I feel so much sympathy for video
game characters now. To live in a world where physics itself is your enemy...
On the other hand, I'm not the most athletic character, so this may come in handy.
—

It's embarrassing to admit, but I'm ﬁnally saved by a bad habit. When I'm really bored,
I drink a lot of water. I probably down 15 mugs of water while listening to the campﬁre
conversation.
That's why I wake up three times to pee this night. The ﬁrst two times I'm super
sleepy and drop back into bed immediately, so drinking 10 mugs of water wouldn't
have been enough. But since I drank 15 mugs, I wake up for a third time just before
dawn and sunlight started streaming in before I fall back in bed. That's when I notice
the HP bar over my hand is full!
Do you ever feel as if you're at the brink of a revelation but don't know what it is? I
stand in the doorway and stare sullenly at my hand.
Huh?
HP: 10/10.
Oh!
Suddenly, I realize that my wounds are completely healed. That they were already
healed on the ﬁrst two trips to the outhouse. I stand there grinning like an idiot, still
staring at my hand. I start cackling. Gotta practice that diabolical Dark Warlock laugh,
after all.
My bunkmate throws a pillow at me to shut me up. "What's the big idea, crazy?"
I ignore him. HP reﬁlls every time I sleep, regardless of how long!
—
The next morning proceeds as normal. Two hours of mind-numbing Kobold-bashing
later, the other guys invite me to a game of sportsball. I decline graciously.
Time for a power nap.
Lying in bed in daytime makes me restless. I stare at the ceiling (bottom of the bunk
above) and count the swirls in the wood. That reminds me of the big mahogany dining
table that my parents picked up from a yard sale back when we lived in Ohio.
Can't believe we lugged that old thing all the way to Pennsylvania. My third grade
teacher Ms. Lynn gave out stickers for good behavior. I saved all those stickers and put
them on the legs of that table. Would I ever see it again?
Even though I really miss my parents, it's only the thought of that mahogany table
covered with Hello Kitty stickers that makes me tear up. Was it even mahogany? The
word 'mahogany' makes it sound especially nostalgic, so let's just pretend it was.
I ﬁnally fall asleep and dream of Pittsburgh.
—
I wake up from a nightmare that everything in the world had turned pixelated like
Minecraft. Thank God I landed in an alternate universe with high resolution.
Never thought I'd say this, but I miss alarm clocks. I overslept.

Still, I got HP back as planned. Dragging myself out of bed with the grungy taste of
nap in my mouth, I go collect more Kobold ears. By dinner time, I've caught up with
everyone else. I have 37 ears now, and everyone else only has 36.
At dinner, I tell my unnamed bunkmate about the HP refresh trick. We craft a master
plan.
That night, we take turns sleeping.
He watches me while I fall asleep. As soon as he thinks I'm fully asleep, he shakes me
awake and sends me oﬀ to hunt Kobolds while he takes a nap. When I get back, I
shake him awake, and so on.
By morning the next day, I've made three trips to the Kobold caves and he's made
two. We're so excited by our strategy that we blaze through the afternoon. At the end
of the day, we both pass 70 ears. I arrange mine in neat, morbid stacks of ten under
my bed.
Unfortunately, even though short naps heal HP completely, they don't cure
exhaustion.
I'm having trouble uncrossing my eyes.
"Hey Murphy, how many ﬁngers am I holding up?"
My bunkmate raises a trembling hand. I'm not sure if his hand is shaking or my vision.
"Six?"
We giggle helplessly. It's like being drunk. Whacking Kobolds is hard work!
It's time to get back out there.
—
At this point, I realize it's futile to keep my bunkmate's name from you. His name is
Pluneth and he has the makings of a Core Party Member. Yesterday he kept to the plan
and bashed just as many Kobolds as myself.
Whacking Kobolds with the whole group for a change makes the morning nice and
relaxing. It's almost as if everything is back to normal, even though Pluneth and I have
three times as many ears by this point. That's when it happened.
As I crushed the 6th Kobold of the morning, I heard what I could only describe as The
Narrator Voice from the back of my skull: "Level Up!"
A warm glow travels up my spine and bathes my body in gold light. Yes! God rays
extend from the heavens to shine a spotlight on me ... no I think I imagined that last
part. I check my stats:
LVL: 2
HP: 15/15
Everything else is the same. I suppose stats are just placeholders until we pick
Classes. A few eyes turn to stare inquisitively.

Five minutes later, Pluneth hits Level 2 just after me. Now everyone is glaring.
The cat's out of the bag.
—
"Spill the beans, Murphy! How did you two level up so fast?"
We make the most of a PR disaster. Pluneth and I regale the others with the tale of our
misadventure into sleep deprivation. Mouths hang open in admiration.
"Wow! That's smart!"
A booming laugh emanates from the corner of the dining tent, startling all of us. It's
the Drill Sergeant. The dwarf walks over and claps a muscled hand on each of us,
nearly toppling me over.
"Well done lads. Only 1 in 5 classes ﬁgure out the Sleep Recover before training ends.
The ﬁfth day must be a record."
A mischievous glint ﬂashes across his eyes. He tickles the sunken bag under my
bloodshot right eye with a stout ﬁnger.
"But you boys only solved half the puzzle! You can recover HP just by lying down on a
bed and closing your eyes for a minute. You don't have to fall asleep."
You don't have to fall asleep. You don't have to fall asleep. YOU DON'T HAVE TO FALL
ASLEEP.
The Drill Sergeant's words reverberate in my skull. I bury my face in my hands. All
those hours wasted staring at the wood swirls under Pluneth's bunk, and I could have
just closed my eyes and counted to 60?!

Murphy's Quest Ch 3: Murphyjitsu
Having learned the secret to Sleep Refresh, the rest of Training progresses smoothly.
Throughout the day, we stream in and out of the barracks to get a minute of shut-eye
between Kobold spawns.
12 ears an hour, 10 hours a day, it only takes 8 more mind-numbing days to ﬁnish this
fetch quest. To pass the time, Plun and I share stories and songs on the grassy knoll.
Plun's family was slaughtered by orcs in the war front and he was raised in a local
orphanage. He gets teary-eyed telling the story.
Emotional stuﬀ makes me nervous. I think about how Mom comforts me, and reach a
hand out to pat his shoulder.
I wish I could say we shared a poignant moment of silent understanding between two
human beings and that was somehow enough. I wish I could say that being present for
a friend in his moment of need inextricably linked together the strands of our fates.
The truth is, my hand brushes awkwardly against his (rather bulky) bicep, and he
shoots me a weird look.
"No Homo!" I shout instinctively.
"What?"
"Uh, no comment, no comment. Continue your story please!"
...
"When the slave trade ended several centuries ago, the Belstine peerage decided to
draft their orphans into the war eﬀort." He gives me a long history lesson but I'm too
busy cringing inside.
After Plun's lecture, he teaches me a melancholy song about war veterans ﬁghting to
their dying breath for Beltine. It's altogether mediocre even to my tone-deaf ears. I
absentmindedly pick a modern song to teach him in exchange. What came next, I
should have predicted.
Even in this world, Taylor Swift is an instant hit.
—
I've been dreaming every night of the old world.
"Mommy, why is my name Murphy?"
"Well, dear, I wanted to name you something normal like John or Allen, but I changed
my mind after meeting you. You were just too special!"
She never did tell me what happened. Dad says she ﬁrst went to the hospital to give
birth to me on March 11, 1997.
My birthday is April 4.

It was her decision to name me Murphy, after Murphy's Law:
Everything that can go wrong will go wrong.
Mom used to say, "Murphy, sometimes things just go wrong and it's nobody's fault."
Her words ring in my ears at this very moment as I try to block out the chorus of Back
to December echoing around camp for the fourth day in a row. Plun set it to a local
military theme. Even the LVL 10 guards are singing it.
Will T Swift be my lasting contribution to this world's culture?!
—
We're all set to hit a thousand ears today. Sarge lines us up after breakfast for a ﬁnal
brieﬁng.
"When you complete training, report to the front gate with all thousand ears. You will
be escorted to the Class Choice building, where your specialization will be
determined."
I expect Sarge to regale us with a long tutorial message about the Class system. Long
lists of strengths and weaknesses, personality traits and combat abilities, astrological
signs and job descriptions. Don't All Choose Mage. Healers Are Important Too. That
kind of thing.
But I'm disappointed. He gruﬄy dismisses us.
"Hey Plun, how does Class Choice work?"
"Do you know anything, Murph? The four Classes are Warrior, Mage, Cleric, and
Rogue. Each class specializes in one of the four main stats. Class Choice happens in
that building yonder," Plun gestures at the looming white-gold tower on the horizon,
"It's the last step in a rookie's training."
"OK, thanks!"
I zoom oﬀ to the Kobolds, eager to reach Class Choice ASAP.
—
Character Creation is my guilty pleasure.
My favorite video games are team-based RPGs, where each Core Party Member can be
customized individually. I spent hours pulling sliders and scrolling through menus:
from Eye Color to Forehead Width, from War Scars to Eye Shadow. If the game let you
pick Starting Classes, I'd build one character of each Class and write each a backstory
before picking a favorite.
One character I always come back to: Murphy, Dark Warlock of Good. His special
power:
Chaos Field
Disasters appear around Murphy when least expected. 
Strikes Terror in the hearts of enemy and ally alike.

With pure heart and clear head, Murphy wields the power of Chaos to save the world!
—
970 ears, thirty more to go! Less than three hours left!
Over the years, I've learned to notice the sinking feeling in my stomach when I feel
too optimistic. It's like a lump of smoldering coal burning through my intestines one
layer at a time. The feeling never fails to give me diarrhea later in the day.
"Where ya going, Murph?"
"Be right back!"
I race back to the bunks to check my stash of ears. They're still there.
... 93, 94, 95. Plus the twenty in my sack, none missing. Thank God.
The lump of coal continues to smolder. Too anxious to leave my trophies under the
bed, I start packing them into my knapsack by the ﬁstful.
Two silhouettes appear in the doorway.
"Hand 'em over."

Murphy's Quest Ch 4: Noticing
Confusion
Two muscle heads stand in the doorway, clubs out. Let's call them Crabbe and Goyle.
Were those really their names? Might as well have been.
"Hand 'em over," Crabbe smacks his Wood Club against his other hand like a police
baton.
Now it came to me: these two had been missing from Training almost every day since
the Sleep Refresh was revealed. My spidey sense went oﬀ just as they'd snuck oﬀ to
steal my hard-earned ears.
Cornered, my adrenaline kicks in. Mind starts racing.
What would Harry do?
They messed with the wrong interdimensional traveler. Imma go Robert Downey Junior
on these fuckers.
All the possibilities lay themselves clearly before my eyes. Knock out their knees. One
running jump. A feint to the side. I'll point behind them wide-eyed to distract -
—
"Murphy! Murphy!"
"Wh— What happened?"
"Crabbe and Goyle knocked you out and stole your ears!"
I sit bolt upright, but already know it's too late. Plun helps me up and we shuﬄe
shamefaced into the Drill Sergeant's oﬃce.
—
" - and that's the last thing I remember, Sir."
Sarge studies me in contempt.
He'll ﬁnd the bastards. They can't get away with this.
The silence draws out like a string of mozzarella cheese from a hot pizza.
"Let that be a lesson, boy. Out there, in the dungeons, you won't get a second - "
I run outside. I'm in no mood to take shit from this midget. The other boys are gone
now, probably already left for Class Choice. Only Murphy left. Without me, they'd still
be slaving away at 9 ears a day.
A Kobold spawns nearby. I bash its head savagely.
"I will enjoy watching you die."

I don't remember what that's from, but the words ﬂow smoothly out of my mouth. I
barely notice the Kobold Scratch as I kill the pathetic little beast.
Crabbe, Goyle, I'm coming for you!
—
"Murph! Hey!"
A voice pulls me out of my rage.
"Plun? What are you doing here?"
"You thought I'd abandon you, Murph? What kind of friend do you take me for?"
The word disorients me. Here, in this fantasy world, I plan to acquire plenty of Core
Party Members, but ...
"Friend?"
"You asshole, Murph. You think just because I'm an army-raised orphan I don't know
how to be a friend? Listen, take half my ears. It's only gonna take four more days if we
farm these fuckers together."
There's times when you have no words to say, so you just hold the other person as
tight as you can and cry. This was one of those times. In anime, this would be high
time to cut to a montage: meeting eyes during training, singing Back to December,
hunting Kobolds together, sharing stories on sleepless nights.
But this isn't anime.
This is real life, and I'm crying my eyes out, hugging my best friend.
"Murph, you whiny little fuck. You owe me."
I like to think I saw a tear at the edge of Plun's eye as well. It's the ﬁrst time since I
landed in this strange yet familiar world that everything feels - three-dimensional.
Real.
Too real.
—
The staﬀ leaves Plun and I to our own devices, and we set up near the Kobold spawns
to farm. I ﬁgure out that Sleep Refresh doesn't happen lying on grass, but it does work
when we lie on blankets.
We lie down on our blankets next to adjacent Kobold caves, bopping them as they
spawn. It reminds me of a beach vacation, except instead of sipping martinis the two
of us kill Kobolds every ﬁve minutes. Ears collect up in pile
"Hey Murph?"
"Sup?"

"All those stories you tell. About horseless carts and number machines and the big
lake and Murica. They're true, aren't they?"
"Yep."
"So you're not from here - I mean this world - are you?"
"Nope."
"Huh."
We pass out under the open sky.
—
The second day, I have a brilliant idea. I've been studying Kobold Younglings in the
neighboring caves. They scurry oﬀ in a random direction and disappear out of sight,
and only attack if aggroed.
I tell Plun my idea after breakfast.
We raid the empty barracks and drag all the furniture - desks, chairs, mattresses,
dressers. Arranging them in a simple maze, all the Kobolds only have one way to run -
directly into us. It takes the whole afternoon.
Plun and I sit back and relax, bopping the Kobolds in waves of six as they run through
our furniture funnel.
By mid-afternoon the third day, we make the quota of 2000 total ears.
—
There's a spring in my step as we approach the gate.
The gate guard dumps the contents of our sacks into what I can only assume are
magic counting bags. He waves us through.
A scarred, muscular hand stops me just as I'm leaving.
"Hey kid, we'll miss you around here. Make sure to visit."
Is this a sidequest?
"Yessir, Sarge!"
As the dwarf wanders oﬀ, we hear a familiar melody in his gruﬀ voice.
♫ I'd go back to December, turn around and make it all right ♫
♫ I go back to December all the time ♫
—
Hooded, silent priests direct us through the Class Choice building. Plun and I separate
into two adjacent rooms.
Mine is completely empty.

Narrator Voice turns on in my head:
"Murphy, Level 3 Human, are you ready for Class Choice?"
I tap the Yes button that appears in the air.
"Please stand by as we calculate your designated Class."
Nani?!
"No, no, no."
"Please stand by as we calculate your designated Class."
The pleasant feminine Narrator Voice is only a tad less grating than Dad's GPS.
—
Wanna know how I survived to the age of 16 in this cruel life, where even inanimate
objects are imbued with diabolical malice against me?
Normal people have ﬁve stages of grief. I've learned to cut it down to two by skipping
straight to acceptance. The clues I should have noticed ﬂood through me.
"You will be escorted to the Class Choice building, where your specialization will be
determined."
The strange lack of tutorials for Class Choice.
Plun's remarkable nonchalance about Class Choice. What had he said?
"Class Choice happens in that building yonder."
Not "we choose our Class in that building yonder."
I should have noticed...we don't choose our own Classes...it's Chosen for us...
A weaker man would plead with the Gods of Fate to be selected as Mage. But I know
what's coming, and I choose to accept my fate with open arms. That choice, at least,
is in my power.
"Cleric!"
Acceptance somehow fails to stem the ﬂow of tears down my cheeks.

Murphy's Quest Ch 5: Fail Gracefully
"I need healing!"
"Murph, over here! I'm wounded!"
"Heal me!"
"I need healing!"
I aim my Initiate Chimes at Plun and cast Heal. The spell sends a circular golden orb
crawling through the air. It misses my party by a wide margin and vanishes into the
dungeon wall.
"I need healing!"
Chimes must be the silliest weapons ever invented: a combination Menora/Wind
Chime, with candles on top and musical instrument on bottom. I dangle the Holy
weapon away from my body, trying not to light my loose-ﬁtting Initiate Robes on ﬁre.
"I need healing!"
"Murph, top me up!"
A second golden orb leaves my Chimes. It grazes Plun's buttock before connecting
with an enemy Bandit, saving her from the brink of death.
"Whose side are you on, dipshit?!"
At ﬁrst, the enemy tried to focus-ﬁre me. They soon realized I can self-Heal, and
furthermore that I can't hit anyone else with this slow-moving skillshot.
That's why I, LVL 3 Cleric Murphy, am standing in the center of the ﬁght bodyblocking
for our Mage Vant.
"I need healing!"
By divine providence I ﬁnally land a Heal on our Rogue Tess as she weaves around.
Tess and I have ... philosophical disagreements about the proper way to play Rogue.
I'd rather she STAY IN ONE PLACE and shoot arrows. Instead she insists on running in
dagger style.
"I need healing!"
"I JUST HEALED YOU!"
—
I met a few minor setbacks since last week.
Class Choice is an archaic name. Once upon a time, nobody picked Cleric. The Church
complained. Now "The Goddess" chooses for you. Class Choice is permanent.

Clerics are members of the Church who specialize in Healing and Purity magic. Main
stat FTH, secondary INT. Stats are determined by LVL and equipment, but also can be
trained individually.
The basic Heal spell is a skill-shot single-target heal. The size and power of the orb
scale oﬀ FTH, and the speed of the orb scales oﬀ INT.
XP sharing is out of whack in this world. XP for a kill is divided equally among all
players who dealt damage to the enemy and all players who healed them. With my
weak and impossible-to-aim Heal spell, this becomes an issue.
One might ask, "Why is your Heal so weak, Murphy? Have you been slacking oﬀ?"
To make a long story short:
—
INT is trained by reading the Training Books in the Library. The moment I got a free
hour I went over to get some INT buﬀs. Here's the ﬁrst line of Training Book 1:
Yberz vcfhz qbybe fvg nzrg, pbafrpgrghe nqvcvfpvat ryvg, frq qb rvhfzbq grzcbe
vapvqvqhag hg ynober rg qbyber zntan nyvdhn.
That's right. The spoken language in this world is slightly accented modern English,
but the written language is ROT13. Or rather, they use the character 'N' to refer to our
letter 'A,' 'O' for 'B,' etc.
ROT13 English turns out to be way harder to learn than a random other language.
—
FTH is trained by daily prayer and ... chastity.
The ﬁrst words Father Penitence said to me: "Dear boy, the ﬁngers of the Devil wrap
around your heart. Deliver yourself from sin!"
The second morning, Father Humility casually passed me in the hall: "To sin with
yourself is to tread roughshod on the gifts of the Goddess."
At dinner, Father Temperance only serves me a half-portion of porridge: "Lust is a slow
and insidious killer, my child."
As I hurry into Mass, Father Generosity shook his greying head: "Every day, we stray
further from the Goddess's light."
Even the mute old monk who sweeps the ﬂoors crosses himself every time I pass by.
I have a problem, ok?
These priests are like walking blacklights, and the stacking chastity penalties are no
joke.
Only with my iron will do I barely manage to keep my FTH stat aﬂoat.
—

For the perfectly understandable reasons outlined above, despite being forced to pray
twice as much as the other Initiates, my current stats are:
 
NAME: Murphy
RACE: Human
CLASS: Cleric
LVL: 3
HP: 21/21
STR: 7
INT: 7
FTH: 4
AGI: 7
EQUIPPED: Initiate Chime, Initiate Robes.
Needless to say, I am not in the healthiest of mental states.
—
Plun and Vant, neither of whom I managed to heal, ﬁnish oﬀ the last two bandits.
Plun merrily loots the bandit's corpses.
Vant chugs a blue potion.
A gold LVL UP! circle spirals up around Tess, making her the ﬁrst of us to reach LVL 5.
And that was the last straw.
—
But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object
evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their
duty, to throw oﬀ such Government, and to provide new Guards for their future
security.
The ﬁghting spirit of our Founding Fathers still shines through these words. Dear
reader, I hope you ﬁnd the generosity in your heart to understand, if not to forgive,
the crime I am about to commit. Know that I am compelled to this act by my duty as
an American to right a long train of injustice, and by forces of nature beyond my
control.
What act of deﬁance can right the abuses and usurpations delivered me in this
inhospitable reality? There is no ocean into which I can dump tea. No redcoat I can tar
and feather.

No, only one crime is equal to the task.
I tiptoe down the sleeping corridors towards the chapel, driven by the certainty that
Fate herself is out to get me, animated by the will to take revenge against her.
Past the dorms, where my fellow Initiates sleep soundly.
Past the priests' quarters, from which snores prayers emanate.
Past the silent monk, who crosses himself when he sees me.
Past the point of no return.

Murphy's Quest Ch 6: Perverse
Incentives
How did I end up in this position?
Let's review the facts.
First.
From Class Choice to ROT13, from Harry Potter villains to this chastity cult, from XP
sharing to judgy old men, this world is out to get me.
Second.
I have despaired of living the Good Life and decided to take revenge.
Third.
There is a little-known law of biology which states that the male gaze, rapacious as it
normally is, doubles in rapaciousness for each day ungratiﬁed. By my count, this
makes me 32 times as susceptible to the female form as the average 16 year old
male.
Fourth.
The only remotely feminine thing in this church is a life-sized Goddess statue in the
chapel.
It is for these reasons that I ﬁnd myself, just before the stroke of midnight on the 17th
of February of the 2014th year of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, standing half-naked
on the preacher's podium in said chapel, facing said statue, relieving said ungratiﬁed
urge.

Murphy's Quest Ch 7: Outside the Box
"I need to pee."
...
"I need to pee."
...
"I really need to pee!"
Father Penitence prays louder to drown out my requests, "Goddess above, lead this
forsaken soul back to the fold."
"Father, I really need to pee!"
He replies through gritted teeth, "You went ten minutes ago."
"I'm sorry, I drink water obsessively when I'm bored!"
Father Penitence heads upstairs, leaving me alone in the darkness.
"Hey wait! I really need to pee!"
A half hour later, he brings me a chamber pot.
—
The number on my wrist has been decreasing steadily since The Incident. As far as I
can tell, it ticks down by one every minute.
FTH: -936
There it goes. It's pretty useful for keeping time down here.
I wonder when it'll stop.
FTH: -937
I wonder if it'll ever stop.
—
Nobody ever talks about how boring jail is. Thankfully, I have Father Penitence to keep
me company. He's not much of a conversationalist, but he has a way with words.
"Dear Goddess, grant this wayward youth the wisdom to repent."
I've never heard one man express the same sentiment in so many diﬀerent ways.
"Mother in Heaven, may your inﬁnite grace ..."
FTH: -2144

—
When you hit rock bottom, there's nowhere to go but up.
My strength and motivation are returning to me. A boy my age can only mope around
for so long. The way I see it, there's only three ways this can go:
(A) Plun rallies a rag-tag but loveable rescue squad to break me out of jail.
(B) Demons successfully invade Beltine and I'm freed in the ensuing chaos.
(C) I'm hauled in front of an impartial jury of holy folk and convince them to set me
free with an impassioned speech.
"Father, may I have pen and paper?"
I might as well prepare my speech for option C.
Respected Elders, let me pose one simple question. The word 'sin' derives from the
Greek word 'hamartia,' which means 'to miss the mark.' I stand before you to beg
forgiveness for my sins. Yet what is sin but the unfailing sign of aiming high? Should a
man be punished for missing the mark because in his devotion to the Goddess he sets
his sights too high? My fate is ...
FTH: -4723
—
Another day, another catastrophe.
Last night I knocked over the chamber pot whilst getting up to pee. The shards of
ceramic on the ground bring to mind two options that I missed:
(D) Hide a shard, kill Father Penitence as he approaches and steal his key.
(S) (for Shawshank.) Dig for twenty years.
I try to block them out of my mind, but the damage has been done. By noticing these
alternatives, I signiﬁcantly reduced the chances of options A-C.
No more thinking for me.
FTH: -6120
—
I wake to the sound of an alarm clock.
8:00AM.
Shoot, I'm late for the bus!
I throw on some clothes and hop downstairs.
"Honey, don't forget your lunchbox!"

Mom hands me a heavy box as I run out the door for the approaching school bus. I
make it just in time. I walk down the aisle to take my usual seat at the very back.
The bus is empty except for three other passengers: the sweeper monk, a blind crone,
and a one-eyed raven.
That's strange.
I search my mind for the source of that note of confusion.
My lunchbox sure is heavy today.
I open it to ﬁnd an atomic bomb. The timer is set to 6:00. The countdown starts.
I read somewhere that an atomic bomb has a blast radius of one mile.
My mile time is 7:43.
I run back down the aisle, faster than I've ever run in my life. So fast I start to worry
about special relativity.
Isn't it funny that with respect to the Earth's frame of reference, I'm running faster
than the bus is moving? Wait...
Shouldn't the bus be shrinking instead of stretching?
The faster I run, the longer the bus stretches.
I run past the one-eyed raven, who caws at me: "Murphy! Run to the Valley of the
Dead, Murphy! Find Mencius in the Valley of the Dead, Murphy!"
Past the blind crone, who points at me with ﬁngers laden with jewelled rings: "Murphy!
Run to the Valley of the Dead, Murphy! In the Valley of the Dead, philosophers are
kings, Murphy!"
Past the silent monk, who crosses himself before opening his mouth to speak to me
for the ﬁrst time: "Murphy! Run to the Valley of the Dead, Murphy! Only one road
leads to the Valley of the Dead, Murphy!"
Past the point of no return.
—
I wake back in my cell with a shriek.
It was just a dream. Just a dream. Just a dream.
I shiver and check the time.
FTH: -7199
Just before midnight. As I calm down, I notice a ﬁgure at the door.
Oh god!
I scramble away in terror.

It's the silent monk.
He unlocks the door to my cell. Every bone in my body wants to scream. He gestures
for me to leave.
I blink. This monk is my savior?
As I walk out of the cell, he whispers: "Murphy! Run to the Valley of the Dead, Murphy!
Only one road leads to the Valley of the Dead, Murphy!"
I sprint for dear life.

Murphy's Quest Ch 8: False
Pentachotomy
There's a powerful spell employed by the leaders of my old world called the
Dichotomy. It goes something like this:
1. Pick two unfortunate phenomena.
2. Make an Either/Or statement as if the two phenomena are mutually exclusive.
Famous examples include:
"Either the One Percent are greedy bastards with way too much money Or funneling
money to the poor has no net eﬀect on poverty."
"Either America spends too much money on healthcare Or due to lack of proper
healthcare, thousands of babies die every year of easily preventable causes."
"Either systemic racism throws an unfair number of minorities in prison Or minorities
commit more crime than the average citizen."
The Principle of Dichotomy is:
Although bad things happen, two bad things cannot happen at once.
By this Principle, the Dichotomy spell forces reality to pick a side, reducing the
number of tragedies in the world by one.
Earlier tonight, I laid out ﬁve mutually exclusive ways I might break out of jail.
Unfortunately, the Principle of Dichotomy doesn't hold in this world.
—
(A) Plun rallies a rag-tag but loveable rescue squad to break me out of jail.
I tiptoe down hall after hall, looking for the way out of the inner cloister.
There's a commotion in the front courtyard.
Are they onto me?
The clash of steel. Spells being cast. Someone's ﬁghting.
My curiosity takes over and I sneak towards the noise.
Four hooded ﬁgures stand in the center of the courtyard, surrounded by twenty-odd
priests and initiates in various states of undress. The ﬁght is going about as well for
the four as one can expect against a team of healbots.
"We need to retreat! Rogue, cast smoke bomb!"
It's Plun's voice!

"I can't, I'm silenced!"
I identify two of the other intruders as Tess and Vant, but the last - a hooded shadow
the size of a ﬁve-year-old - I don't recognize.
The voice of a young girl emanates from the cloak, casting powerful Dark magic.
Soon, the clergy knock out Plun, Tess, and Vant, leaving only the child shadow, who
makes a valiant eﬀort. From her miniature staﬀ she casts a continuous torrent of
Shadow Bolts.
Footsteps ring in the corridor behind me.
—-
(B) Demons invade Beltine and I'm freed in the ensuing chaos.
"Finally, your majesssty, after yearsss of ssstudy, I have completed the
teleportasssion devissse."
Evil laughter emanates from behind the obsidian throne.
"If I may, perhapsss we might tessst it out ﬁrssst on a sssmaller target."
After a pause, the man behind the throne speaks, "Leave no survivors."
"Exsssellent point, your majesssty, we mussst maintain the sssecresssy of the
teleportasssion devissse and keep the element of sssurprissse. I know exsssactly the
beassst to sssend."
Three servants walk into the throne room, dragging chains as thick as my arms.
Wrapped in those chains is an enormous snake, twice the length and size of the
largest natural anaconda. Its night black skin is patterned with red-gold stripes.
A clawed hand extends from behind the throne: you are dismissed.
—
(C) I'm hauled in front of an impartial jury of holy folk and convince them to set me
free with an impassioned speech.
The ﬁve of us - Plun, Tess, Vant, the hooded child, and I - kneel in chains.
"Sorry for dragging you into this, Plun."
"What are friends for, Murph?" He manages a pained smile. "We heard about what
you did, pervert."
Father Penitence walks down the aisle towards us.
To Plun, Tess, and Vant: "You break into the consecrated heart of the Goddess and
attack her faithful."
To the hooded child: "You dare to wield the foulest of magic in this holy place."
To me: "And you, you deﬁle -"

For once, words seem to escape Father Penitence.
"Have you anything to say for yourselves?"
That's my cue! I rise to my feet:
"Respected Elders, let me mmphgg"
Father Penitence smacks me back to my knees and gags me with a length of cloth, in
blatant violation of due process.
"For such crimes, there is only one punishment. I sentence you to puriﬁcation by holy
ﬁre!"
I hang my head. The others' faces are ashen.
Only one road leads to the Valley of the Dead, Murphy.
Is this what the silent monk meant?
—
(D) Hide a shard of my chamber pot and use it to escape.
I'm shaken out of my contemplation of mortality by screams.
"Look out!"
"Snake!"
A mesmerizing shadow darts into the chapel. It takes down an Initiate in one bite,
crushing the boy's spine.
"Impossible!"
"Where'd it come from?!"
Clergymen rush in to surround the beast, casting spells and auras I don't recognize.
The ﬁve of us, bound and gagged, struggle pointlessly. The hooded girl is the only one
who can speak. The Fathers must have been unable to take oﬀ her cloak to gag her.
Her voice is shrill and baby-like, "Please, let me out! I can help you! I can kill it!"
One of the Initiates glances away from the ﬁght momentarily. This proves to be a fatal
mistake; the demon snake pounces on him.
"Please untie me!"
The battling clergy ignore her cries. One or two more Initiates are picked oﬀ, but on
the whole the team of healbots forms a solid defense against their venomous enemy.
Because the snake is a living creature, however, holy spells deal no damage. It's a
stalemate.
Something cold touches my hand. I twist around to see the silent monk right behind
me.

"Mmmphhg!"
He slips a sharp something into my hand and walks away. I already know what it is. I
furiously saw at my bindings with the chamber pot shard. After an eternity, the rope
ﬁnally come oﬀ.
Plun and the others shuﬄe towards me, eager to be freed.
"Wait here. There's something I have to try."
I pick up a still-lighted chime from a fallen Initiate.
I check my stats:
FTH: -7311
"Brace yourselves."
Heal!
—
(S) (for Shawshank) Dig for twenty years.
In the magic mirror, a massive ball of purple envelops the battle, vaporizing several of
the clergymen and the snake demon on contact.
The throne room falls into dead silence.
One man drops to his knees.
"Your majesssty, pleassse! It wasss a missstake! Give me another chanssse!"
The clawed hand makes an ominous sign, which a courtier interprets:
"For your failure, you are hereby sentenced to twenty years of hard labor in his
Majesty's mines."
"No! Mersssy!"

Murphy's Quest Ch 9: Double Crux
"Level Up!"
"Level Up!"
"Level Up!"
Could I have predicted this?
Did I expect the Heal orb to grow massive and deal damage on extreme negative FTH?
"Level Up!"
"Level Up!"
Father Penitence. Father Temperance. Father Generosity.
All gone. Forever.
Because of me.
And I feel nothing.
"Level Up!"
"Level Up!"
Is this what I wanted?
Mechanically, I untie Plun and the others.
The world spins faster and faster. I feel so - far away. Like I'm watching my body from
the chandelier.
Dimly, I'm aware that Plun tries to shake me to attention. I watch as Tess tries to slap
me awake.
I watch as the hooded child throws me over her shoulder like a ragdoll and starts
running.
"Level Up!"
She runs with inhuman speed. Plun's shouts fade into the distance.
Where is she taking me?
"Level Up!"
—
The girl removes her hood to reveal a face completely wrapped in bandages. Peeking
through the cloth are two lidless eyes and a tuft of striking purple hair.
"Wake up."

I hear a long-lost part of me thinking, Core Party Member Get!
"Pull yourself together, Murphy."
Old Murphy wonders, How does she know my name?
She shakes me with surprising strength, but gets no response. With a sigh, she slings
me back over her shoulder.
—
Father Penitence. I hated his guts. I wanted him dead. Right?
Father Generosity. He was stern, but he had kind eyes. Did he deserve this?
Father Temperance. He loved his work. He was a good cook.
He was a good man.
What does that make me?
—
"Murphy, wake up."
I do not move.
"It's not your fault. You couldn't have known."
I do not move.
"You saved all our lives. You did what had to be done."
I do not move.
The girl pinches my arm.
I do not move.
She dumps a bucket of freezing water on my head.
I shiver but do not move.
She screams in my ear.
I shake her oﬀ.
She tickles the underside of my foot.
"Leave me alone."
"So you're not completely broken, huh?"
The girl stares into my eyes, unblinking. I look away to the left, but she hops over to
meet my gaze. I close my eyes, but she peels my eyelids open.
"Leave me alone!"

"No time to mope, Murphy. You're a wanted criminal. See those torches in the
distance? The whole town is out to get you."
"Let them."
"No, that won't do." she digs her nails into my arm, "I need you to do something for
me ﬁrst."
I know she's trying to troll a response out of me, but rage still boils under my skin.
Her nails sink deeper, drawing blood.
"Go away, little girl, before I get angry."
"Ooh, is the big, bad murderer gonna hurt an innocent girl?" She giggles, "I'm sooo
scared!"
My ﬁst is still clenched around the dead Initiate's chime. I lift it menacingly to her
face.
She stares me down, "Do it, coward!"
A tense silence ensues.
I can't do it.
She mutters a spell and knocks me out.
"Let's get you to the destination ﬁrst. I'll persuade you on the way."
—
I wake up in a carriage. The purple-haired bandage-wrapped dark warlock girl stares
at me with lidless eyes.
Reﬂexively, I check the time:
FTH: -8139
That makes it 3:39PM. Why is it dark outside?
"You gained 280 points of FTH from levelling up. That makes it 8:19 in the evening."
The cloth on the mind-reading purple-haired bandage-wrapped dark warlock girl's face
twists upwards in a way I can only interpret as a smirk.
"Where are you taking me?"
"Can't you guess, Murphy? They told me you're a smart one."
Overpowered dark magic.
Vocabulary way above her grade level.
Unfazed by my negative FTH Heal.
Wrapped in bandages.

Everything adds up to -
"Murphy!" She cackles in delight. "Run to the Valley of the Dead, Murphy! That dream
is my best work yet."
—
The mummy girl continues to stare, presumably reading my mind.
So you're gonna read my mind, are you?
One, two, three, four. I'll keep counting 'til you get bored.
"Oh, cut that out!"
Five, six, seven, eight. I never cooperate with people I hate.
"Stop that! If you agree to hear me out -"
Nine, ten, eleven, twelve. Not until there's ice in Hell.
"- I'll show you how your friends are doing." She pulls out an obviously enchanted
mirror.
...Fine.
"See, that wasn't so hard, was it? Sorry we got oﬀ on the wrong foot," she extends a
tiny hand.
I shake it with some hesitation.
"Let me introduce myself. Name's Nyra. I was brutally murdered at the age of six."

Murphy's Quest Ch 10: Gears-Like
Models
"Show me my friends."
"Ask nicely."
I swallow what little remains of my pride. "Show me my friends please?"
Nyra draws out the enchanted mirror.
Tess and Vant sleep around what remains of a campﬁre. Perched precariously in a
nearby tree, Plun keeps watch.
"You have loyal friends, Murphy. They visited establishments of - poor repute - to ﬁnd
help to rescue you."
"Is that where they found you?"
"No, I made sure the three of them had no luck ﬁnding aid. I also sent them - fun
dreams - about being rescued from terrible fates by yours truly. So you see they
practically begged me to join when I passed them on the street and accidentally
showed oﬀ a touch of street magic."
"Fat help you were."
The girl bristles. "There were complications. If anything, it's your fault we got caught."
"My fault? I was stuck in a cell!"
"Your friend Pluneth insisted we take a detour into the main chapel to check out your -
handiwork. Against my better judgment, I agreed. We were found out immediately -
the Goddess statue is blessed by a high level detection spell even I can't see."
"Shit! That's how they caught me that night!"
We share a silent moment of commiseration, two souls defeated by the same block of
marble.
"The monk and the snake - you sent them, too?"
"The monk, yes ... I Charmed him to scout the grounds out and ﬁnd you. We were
already surrounded by those pesky priests when the idiot ﬁnally found you. I thought I
might as well try getting you out of there while the attention was on us. As for the
snake, I have no idea..."
"My friends, will they be OK?"
"They're alive, aren't they? Want me to send them a message?"
"You can do that? Sure!"
"Write them a note on this. Keep it short."

I jot a few words down.
"Not much of a poet, are you?"
I shrug.
"Well, here goes."
She whispers something, and the parchment disappears. In the mirror, the letters
appear in crimson on the sleeping Tess's forehead.
Dear Plun,
It's Murph. Thanks for trying to rescue me.
Don't look for me. I'll be ﬁne.
Take care,
Murph
"What? You told me to send them a message, right?"
I can't help admiring her style.
—
"Still hung up over those pesky priests?"
"They didn't deserve to die."
"If it's any comfort, I woulda killed them anyway."
"It really isn't."
"Worse things have happened to better people." Nyra pulls back the bandages around
her chest to reveal several missing ribs under dry, peeling skin. "See?"
I try not to gag. "Stop!"
"It still itches, you know." She inserts a ﬁnger into the cavity where her heart should
have been and starts scratching. "Ahh, that feels better."
"Cover that up! I feel much better now!"
—
"If you can read minds, send dreams, and mind control people, what do you need me
for?"
"Hah! Those parlor tricks only work on low INT enemies and are easily blocked by all
sorts of spells and trinkets. Check out my stats."
She reveals them brieﬂy.
Holy!

"Even with my INT I can barely read your mind. As for the mind control spell, it's called
Charm. Wanna hear its secret?"
I nod eagerly.
Nyra leans in with a conspiratorial whisper.
"Charm was invented by the ﬁrst Dead King, Charmer. Charmer ﬁgured out that
among the living, a rare few have no soul. They look like the living, they move like the
living, they talk like the living, but they feel nothing."
"Woah..."
"Charmer called them philosophical zombies, or p-zombies. The living dead, as
opposed to the Undead. The Charm spell allows a Mage specializing in Dark Magic to
take over the mind of a p-zombie. I scoured your town and only found one - that silent
LVL 1 monk."
"So your skills are smoke and mirrors and you need me to do the real work."
She ignores my jab, "the Valley of the Dead is under attack -"
"Let me stop you right there. You'll never convince me to ﬁght a war for the Undead."
—
To make a long story short, the mind-reading mummy girl convinced me to ﬁght a war
for the Undead.
To be honest, Dark Warlock Emperor Murphy was chomping at the bit to accept her
quest.
Did I mention she can enter dreams in a ... rather pleasing ... form?
The ﬂesh is weak.
—
The next three days on the road are almost as monotonous as prison.
Punctuated only by my regular bathroom breaks, Nyra explains the state of aﬀairs.
The current Dead King Mencius is on the losing side of a long defensive war against
the Inquisition - a militant faction of the Church. Their Holy magic completely
neutralizes Undead powers. They only survived this long by guerrilla warfare and
constant retreat.
Nyra travelled to Beltine undercover to investigate an old rumor that FTH can drop
negative and reverse Holy spell eﬀects, damaging the living and healing the Undead.
Her plan was to ﬁnd and enlist some low-level clerics, until she learned of my
"incident."
From her bags, she shows me a number of powerful FTH spellbooks, all of them
useless for me. Most are buﬀs that would turn to debuﬀs given my stats. The rest are
aura or AoE heals that aﬀect the caster and would insta-kill me.

I'll be relying on the basic Heal spell to save the Valley of the Dead. FTH is a
percentage modiﬁer on its size and power, so 10 FTH corresponds to a 10% larger orb
that heals 10% more damage, while anything below -100FTH starts dealing damage
instead of healing. The orb's speed scales oﬀ INT in the same way, and it lasts a ﬁxed
1 minute in duration which can only be increased with consumables.
Nyra decks me out in level-appropriate Mage gear to increase my INT.
My stats are now:
NAME: Murphy
RACE: Human
CLASS: Cleric
LVL: 31
HP: 595/595
STR: 35
INT: 217
FTH: -13643
AGI: 35
EQUIPPED: Salamander Cloak of Knowledge, Salamander Vambraces of Knowledge...
"Mencius will explain the rest."
—
"We're about a day away."
"The only road to the Valley goes through a narrow pass in the Ghoul's Teeth. The
Inquisition set up patrols all along it, but in that crampt space they should be sitting
ducks for your Heal."
As the word "should" leaves her lips, my stomach drops.
The carriage jolts to a stop.
"What the - "

Murphy's Quest Ch 11: Resolve
As far as the eye can see, the ground is lit up by white-gold runes, tongues of blue
ﬂame and roving God Rays. The mountains ahead look like someone applied a
"Heaven" ﬁlter to a demonic hellscape.
"Consecrated Ground. I've never seen a patch this large."
"I'm guessing it's not Undead-friendly?"
"You could say that. Wait here."
Nyra walks up to the boundary of the Consecrated Ground, whispering spells under
her breath.
She darts through the traps, dancing and weaving past the patchwork of holy ﬂames,
seals, and rays of light. A thousand feet into the Consecrated Ground, she's visibly
fatigued and the runes grow denser.
"Shit!" A slight misstep sets oﬀ a nearby rune, which explodes in a ring of blue ﬁre.
Stymied, she dashes back to me.
—
"Go on without me. Consecrated Ground doesn't hurt the living."
"What? No way!"
"Put on these rings. This one will boost your HP, and this one will take you to Mencius
when you arrive in the Valley. Show it to any Undead who trouble you."
The girl begins slipping rings oﬀ her ﬁngers, ignoring my protests.
"I'll ﬁnd another way."
"Only one road leads to the Valley of the Dead," I repeat her words back to her.
"Murphy, just go!" Nyra glares at me, "Cast Heal as soon as you see the enemy."
Think, Murphy! There has to be a way to get her through with me.
"This is more important than me, idiot!"
Think!
The words - drawn from distant memory as if by narrative force - stumble oﬀ my
tongue.
"Curious is the trapmaker's art, his eﬃcacy never witnessed by his own eyes."
"What?"

"Trapmaking, however eﬀective, is almost impossible to learn because it lacks
feedback loops. Trapmakers never witness their own creations in action. So they
always miss things."
I start stripping oﬀ my clothes.
—
"What are you doing, pervert?! Have you lost your mind?"
"I'm going to keep casting Heal in your direction. Keep contact with the orb and it'll
outheal the Holy damage."
The plan dawns on her.
"Good idea!"
I check my stats. With only my Salamander Leggings of Knowledge on, my INT comes
out to 85. Heal orbs will travel at the speed of a brisk jog.
"Ready?"
"Ready!"
—
What a strange sight we must have been. The purple-haired mummy girl jogging next
to a moving dark-purple orb the size of a sphere. The shirtless youth running a
cautious distance behind, pausing every so often to cast another orb.
The hill steepens and grass all but disappears underfoot, but the Consecrated Ground
continues to stretch up into the clouds.
While I'm soaked with sweat, Nyra shows no signs of fatigue.
I take ﬁve second pauses to cast each Heal, setting me further and further behind.
One step at a time.
Holy ﬁre feels like a gentle tickle, but lactic acid eats into my thighs.
"Have to slow down..." I croak.
Jogging in place, Nyra glances back in alarm.
There's no way to slow down without slowing down the orbs.
There's no turning back now.
Oﬀ come the pants.
—
You might think that coming up with a clever idea would assuage wounded pride.
You might think massacring a dozen high-level Inquisition soldiers would heal a
bruised ego.

You might think getting more exercise than ever is worth celebrating.
You would be wrong.
None of that compares to the humiliation of shivering in sweat-soaked underwear
while a little girl riﬂes through her knapsack for your clothes.
Pride is a funny thing.
Just when you think you've lost it all, it turns out there's more to lose.

Murphy's Quest Ch 12: Meta-
Contrarianism
[Any resemblance to actual persons, intentional or otherwise, is entirely coincidental.]
"Where's Mencius?"
"In the old fort."
Nyra leads me through the bedraggled Undead camp. Skeletons and embalmed dead
make way respectfully, but they shoot me glares that send shivers up my spine.
As the creaky drawbridge to the fort lowers ponderously, she briefs me on the Dead
King.
"Mencius is a wise and competent king, but he has peculiar ideas about government."
"Such as?"
"He insists that a king is a public servant, and must be - what does he call it -
democratically selected by his people on a regular basis."
"That's common where I come from."
She shoots me a queer look.
—
"That's him," Nyra whispers as we enter the courtyard.
The skeleton she points to stands half a head shorter than his attendants, wearing
sleek metal armor under a black cape. His left eye is covered by an eye-patch.
"Mencius, I've brought the boy."
"Nyra, welcome home. And you must be Murphy!"
Just to be on the safe side, I bow. "Your Majesty -"
Two ﬁrm skeletal hands lift me out of the bow.
"Save the formalities. Here we are all equals, living or dead. Call me Mencius."
"Nyra told me all about you, sir."
"Uhoh. You must forgive an old man his crazy ideas."
The attendants laugh a little too genuinely. A shadow ﬂits across the few remaining
sinews of Mencius's face.
"We have a saying in my homeland: government of the people, by the people, for the
people."

Mencius beams widely.
Before he can reply a raven swoops in from the heavens and lands on his outstretched
hand. It has only one bulbous eye.
The courtyard falls silent.
"What have you learned, darling?"
Mencius strokes the bird with his bony ﬁngers, and it dissolves into smoke, leaving
behind the much-too-large eyeball. He pulls back his eyepatch and pops it into the
waiting socket. With a ﬂick of his a ﬁnger, the eye spins it into place.
"I'm sorry, but there's no time for banter. The enemy will be upon us by nightfall. Will
you shed blood with us, Murphy?"
In the eyes of the king of the Undead, I see what I can only describe as a triumphant
call to life.
"With all my heart, sir!"
—
Nyra leads me from tent to tent, outﬁtting me with custom-made equipment. Had we
been less pressed for time, I might have befriended the blacksmith brothers LeBrawn
and LeBrain despite their heavy accents. I might have acquired a fetch quest or ten
from the alchemist Solomon and learned from him the secrets to absinthe and
wormwood.
One trip, however, could not be rushed.
The jeweller Penelope's tent stands out, twice the size of any other tent in the camp,
decorated with gaudy silks and gems. Penelope turns out to be the old hag from my
dream. That explains why her skin looked like it was melting oﬀ.
Penelope unlocks a trunk and picks out a handful of brilliant diamond rings for me.
"You can wear more than two rings at once?" I blurt out in surprise. I expected this
universe to prevent such an exploitable mechanic.
"Try."
Penelope waggles her right hand at me. Each ﬁnger ﬁts three identical sapphire rings,
for a total of ﬁfteen.
I squeeze a ring onto my foreﬁnger. The next one - refuses to go on my hand. It goes
onto my other hand ﬁne, but then the third ring won't go on either.
"You're in for a treat, darling."
Penelope draws my eye to the pentagram on the ﬂoor. She whispers the procedure in
my ear.
"- It only works with exactly identical rings."
To say I rolled on the ground laughing would be an understatement.

—
Wear a Massive Diamond Ring on each hand.
Step into the Summoning Circle.
Chant the incantation and the Demon's name.
All my equipment is removed by the spell.
A Minor Fell Imp appears in the center of the pentagram.
"Whaddaya -"
Chant the Cancel Summoning incantation.
The Minor Fell Imp disappears.
My equipment reappears.
The two Massive Diamond Rings appear together on my right foreﬁnger.
Equip another Massive Diamond Ring on the left.
Repeat.
The Minor Fell Imp pops in and out of the tent.
"Whaddaya -"
"Stop -"
"Who the -"
"The fuck -"
I kinda feel sorry for the little guy.
—
Before the ﬁnal preparations, Nyra pulls me aside.
"Are you sure you can do it?"
"Don't worry about me."
"Not too long ago, you seemed awfully shaken up about murder."
I struggle for words to explain how a sixteen-year-old might understand warfare.
"I was shaken up about killing good men. In war, there are no good men. Only
monsters."
—
The bells toll the alarm. The army of Undead gathers in the courtyard, spilling out into
the camp in a wide circle.

On the ramparts, the Dead King Mencius stands alone.
Cinematic time.
"Children! Brothers! Sisters! The Valley of the Dead is the eternal resting place of the
Undead. The Inquisition dares to disturb our slumber with their blazing crosses and
holy swords!
"With their cowardly techniques and overwhelming numbers, they beat us back
temporarily. But our enemy is blind! Blind men cowering under the skirts of a blind
Goddess."
"Blind men!" The crowd roars back.
"Yesterday, the Seeing feared the Blind. Yesterday, the Dead feared the Living. But
that is not the way of the world. From this day forward, the Blind will fear the Seeing.
From this day forward, the Living will fear the Dead!"
The crowd bellows.
"The Living will fear the Dead! The Living will fear the Dead! The Living will fear the
Dead!"
Mencius's left eye ﬂutters to life, shooting out of his socket in the form of a raven.
"I, the One-Eyed Raven, have ﬂown across the kingdoms of Demons and Men looking
for the key to this war. Today, I found that key!"
Nyra prods me, and I run up the steps to Mencius' side.
"This boy will be the Ultimate Weapon in our war against the Blind Inquisition. Bring
the prisoner!"
Skeletal guards drag out a man clothed in the red robes of the Inquisition.
"Our sister Skala, out of the kindness of her unbeating heart, nursed this cretin to
health. For that mistake, he murdered Skala in cold blood.
"Today you face the judgment of the Ultimate Weapon!"
With a ﬂourish, Mencius turns to stand next to the bound Inquisitor. He nods to me.
I hold up my Chime.
Heal!
The army of the dead cries out in alarm as a giant purple orb blossoms from my
weapon to envelop their king. In the blink of an eye, it clips through almost half the
fort, extending ten stories into the sky. The orb travels into the distance.
Mencius appears out of the purple completely unscathed. Of the Inquisitor, only
crimson robes remain.
The Dead King turns to face the crowd and lifts my hand to the sky.
"The Ultimate Weapon!"

"The Ultimate Weapon!" The sea of faces chants. "The Ultimate Weapon! The Ultimate
Weapon!"

Murphy's Quest Ch 13: Existential
Risk
FTH: -23335
The ﬁrst battle is a rout.
Surrounded by a dedicated defensive squad, I pummel the enemy with gigantic balls
of death. Negative FTH Heal deals an entirely new category of damage, completely
bypassing Damage Reduction. I call it my Bubble of Doom.
After the battle, we track the trails of my orbs for thousands of feet. Crimson Inquisitor
swords, chimes and robes scatter across the ground in long rows. Entire platoon
vaporized in place, their equipment laid out in neat, legible squares.
Some of the robes are ﬁtted for children.
The reality of the carnage has yet to hit me.
"This place is a graveyard."
Nyra touches my hand, "As it should be. This is the Valley of the Dead, after all."
She's still working on the whole comforting thing.
—
FTH: -27881
The enemy beats a hasty retreat, and we pounce.
The One-Eyed Raven scouts out group after group of isolated enemies left behind by
the larger force.
At my insistence, Nyra sends each group a ﬁnal message: one chance to surrender.
The idiots never take it.
According to doctrine, if they surrender they will be executed and banished to Hell.
This way at least, the Goddess will grant their loyal souls mercy in Heaven.
I send them there graciously.
What is it that Oppenheimer said?
I am become Death, destroyer of worlds.
—
FTH: -29316
The Inquisition pulls out all the stops. We face a new enemy: a Phoenix Rider.

One Final Boss-level Cleric rides the ﬂaming bird, raining Holy Fire upon us from far
above. He ﬂies too fast to hit with Bubble of Doom.
"We're taking too much damage!"
"We have to retreat!"
The army of the dead holes up in the old fort, waiting for an opportunity.
—
FTH: -30790
On the distant hilltops, well out of my range, the enemy sets up a ring of camps. They
slowly begin to cast Consecrated Ground. The ring of light shrinks around us like a
tightening noose.
The Phoenix Rider continues to take pot shots from on high. He begins to show
frustration.
"Come out, cowards!"
The One-Eyed Raven is our only hope. Searching for a weakness.
If I have to eat any more consumables I'll puke.
—
FTH: -31953
The enemy camps creep down into the valley, and Consecrated Ground surrounds us
on all sides.
Even at midnight, it's bright as day outside. Not as if the Dead need sleep.
Mencius orders me to switch into defensive gear.
Nyra unclasps her necklace and hands it to me. It's a pink heart that opens up to show
a tiny painting of a little girl.
"Keep this on until the day you die, and you will be reborn as Undead."
When the Phoenix Rider rests,
When the Inquisition sleeps,
When the One-Eyed Raven ﬁnds the Grand Inquisitor's camp,
The Dead will make their ﬁnal charge.
—
FTH: -32745
The Phoenix Rider missteps. He ﬂies back to camp, leading us straight to their central
command.

The One-Eyed Raven spies the Grand Inquisitor watching over the Phoenix Rider as he
sleeps.
Mencius says he's a boy my age.
—
We make the ﬁnal preparations.
Our plan is to re-use the strategy I employed to protect Nyra through Consecrated
Ground.
Nyra forces a massive Potion of Greater Extended Duration down my throat.
I cast a Bubble of Doom.
Fifteen stories high, the purple ball blocks out the Sun, barrelling forward.
"The Living will fear the Dead!"
The army of the dead charges forward into the Bubble. Inside, damage taken by the
Undead is immediately restored.
A lump of coal sits in my stomach.
—
FTH: -32763
In three waves, the army of the dead ﬁll out three giant Heal orbs, running at a
breakneck speed towards the enemy camp.
I don my INT gear and follow behind as quickly as I can.
The enemy doesn't expect us.
We cleave through the startled guards, reaching the Grand Inquisitor's tent in a
matter of minutes.
The lump of coal grows hotter. Hotter than it's ever been.
—
A whole war is decided in ﬁve minutes.
The army of the dead, practically invincible enveloped in my Bubbles of Doom, cut
through unprepared enemies like knives through warm butter.
Their spells and arrows shoot out from within the Bubbles, taking down everything in
their way.
The Grand Inquisitor and the Phoenix Rider emerge from their tent just in time to be
vaporized.
Within each Bubble, the relief is palpable.
The enemy ranks scatter.

Did we win?
My stomach is screaming.
I check the time.
FTH: -32768
—
"Get out of the orbs!"
The army of the dead is too far away to hear my screams.
They continue the wild charge towards the ﬂeeing Inquisition.
Time slows to a crawl.
—
I fall to my knees.
I'm sorry, Nyra.
I'm sorry, Mencius.
I didn't think of everything.
—
FTH: 32767
Purple turns to gold.
Bones to ash.
With them, my dreams.
Murphy, sometimes things just go wrong and it's nobody's fault.
FIN

Murphy's Quest Postmorterm
Kudos to lifelonglearner for amazing cover art that is also an example of Murphy's Law.
The full text of Murphy's Quest (with many corrections) is now available in PDF.
Introduction
Having been kept away from expository writing for a week, I have all too many thoughts to
express. This post will contain a long mishmash of my feelings about ﬁction-writing
experienced during my week-long adventure into Murphy's Quest. I have tried on at least
three occasions in the past to write full-length novels, but this is the ﬁrst product I would
consider readable. This postmortem is a combination of how those projects failed, and why
this one didn't.
Better writers have given writing advice. However, due to the phenomenon I once called
Teaching Ladders, the fundamentals I learned writing my ﬁrst viable story may be more
useful to the beginning writer than the grand strategies employed by masters.
If there is a single black hole remaining in my writing, it would be that I still have no idea how
to write extended and psychologically dramatic scenes involving multiple thinking
characters. The number of variables spins out of control too rapidly. Any ideas about how
anyone has ever managed this would be appreciated.

The ﬁrst section will describe my motivation for writing in the style of a light novel in
particular.
The second section will describe the many technical details of writing I discovered along the
way. In my opinion, the technical aspect of writing is altogether undervalued, and I would go
so far as to say that cleaner writing directly produces cleaner thinking.
Motivation
I want this post to serve as encouragement for people to put out more rationalist-adjacent
ﬁction online. HPMoR is an impossible the standard to live up to, but pretty much anyone
could write at the level of Murphy's Quest. And people still enjoyed reading it!
1. Light Novels
The aesthetic for Murphy's Quest came from Eliezer's wonderful light novels Dark Lord's
Answer and A Girl Corrupted by the Internet is the Summoned Hero?! and the rabbit-hole of
Japanese light novels they led me down. When I read the medium I instantly knew that I
would not be writing full-length novels for a long long time.
First of all, there's an unbelievable psychological gap between writing a short story - which
takes no more than a day or two - and a full-length novel - which takes at bare minimum a
month. As far as I can tell, this gap makes it unreasonably hard to progress as a writer
towards larger projects. Light novels ﬁll this progressional gap snugly.
What is it about light novels that's so exciting? I think the answer is something like: most
novels are 80% ﬁller. We've all read enough novels that our minds automatically skip through
and ﬁll in the lurid descriptions of embroidered curtains sashaying like exotic belly-dancers. A
story can only take so much mood-setting before it becomes mood-killing. Get to the damn
boss ﬁght already!
With a light novel, the writer does the work of cutting out ﬁller for you. Only the bones - or as
I prefer the soul - of the story remains. When I skip a week-long caravan ride across a
continent, I trust the the reader's mind to ﬁll in all the gaudy details of WeIrD fOrEiGn CiTiEs
and mini-boss ﬁghts and over-the-top NPC encounters along the way.
2. Overcoming Modesty
I ﬁnally ﬁnished Inadequate Equilibria the other day and am convinced that Status
Regulation and Anxious Underconﬁdence is by far the most important chapter of them all.
It's somehow a radically fresh take on the usual refrain "just try things." At least for me,
there was an enormous psychological modesty barrier I had to overcome to write online, and
another one to write ﬁction. What are the gears of this modesty?
The ﬁrst problem, Anxious Underconﬁdence, boils down to people being extremely risk-
averse. If you try new things, most of them will fail. That's ﬁne. Recalibrate the base rate of
failure that you're willing to tolerate. For me repeating the mantra "If you haven't failed in
the last six months, you're not trying hard enough" was good enough to solve this problem.
Then again, I'm risk-seeking by nature.
The second and more central (to me) problem, Status Regulation, is that every time I asked
myself "Am I ready to write ﬁction?" the question I should have been asking is "How good am
I at writing ﬁction?", but my brain translated it to "Do I have enough generalized status to
deserve to write ﬁction?" instead.

Even properly functioning status maps are very low-resolution; I might be able to make
decent decisions in my ﬁeld of expertise where I've calibrated my status against my
competence with peers of every skill level, but I sure as hell can't about something like
writing.
For any given question of modesty, especially outside one's domain of expertise, how should
you decide if you're good enough? Eliezer's answer is that you should ﬁnd a cheap way to
query objective reality rather than querying your status regulation systems. Actually design
a cheap experiment that will tell you if you're good enough. Unlike my previous novel-writing
projects that petered out over months, holding myself to a week-long light novel was the
cheap experiment I needed to make.
Technique
This section records some of the object-level rules that I've learned make for crisper story-
telling.
1. Omit Needless Words
Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should contain no unnecessary words, a
paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason that a drawing should have
no unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary parts. This requires not that the
writer make all his sentences short, or that he avoid all detail and treat his subjects only
in outline, but that every word tell.
This is still my favorite passage about writing, from anywhere, ever. Here are three speciﬁc
examples of this injunction.
Remove "he said"s and "she replied"s from dialogue. Consider:
"Mencius is a wise and competent king, but he has peculiar ideas about government."
"Such as?"
"He insists that a king is a public servant, and must be - what does he call it -
democratically selected by his people on a regular basis."
"That's common where I come from."
She shoots me a queer look.
"Follow my lead."
Versus:
"Mencius is a wise and competent king," she says, "but he has peculiar ideas about
government."
"Such as?" I ask.
"He insists that a king is a public servant, and must be - what does he call it -" she
pauses to search her memory, "democratically selected by his people on a regular
basis."
"That's common where I come from," I reply.
She shoots me a queer look.

"Follow my lead," she cautions me.
It should be clear from context who is speaking. This also forces you to write better dialogue
in general, giving ﬁxed speech tics and patterns to each character. Dialogue will ﬂow more
snappily and smoothly.
Write in the present tense. Everyone knows to write in the active voice. But have you
tried writing ﬁction in present tense? Almost every word is shorter in the present tense.
Action feels more immediate and impactful. Thoughts more forward-looking and intimate.
Write in the present tense.
Protect negative space like you protect your slack. Negative space is essential in
ﬁction. Leave as much as possible to the imagination. They say a picture is worth a thousand
words - that's why I prefer text to video. A thousand words is way too many to waste on a
single frame.
Negative space forces the reader to do mental work. This is a matter of taste - as a reader I
like to ﬁll in the gaps, so I'll leave gaps in my writing.
2. Lessons from Impro
Impro is a book that contains life-changing insight on every page. I still haven't ﬁnished it
because every section I read leaves my worldview completely shattered. The whole book
contains insight for writers, but Section 3, "Narrative Skills," is especially relevant. Here are
the main ideas I've drawn from Impro:
Your mind is constantly making up stories. All you have to do is look. For Murphy's
Quest, I spent a good ten hours lying in bed with my eyes closed, simply walking through the
environment and seeing the sights that popped up. I also incorporated tidbits from some of
my recent dreams.
Reincorporation. The famous example is Chekhov's gun:
Remove everything that has no relevance to the story. If you say in the ﬁrst chapter that
there is a riﬂe hanging on the wall, in the second or third chapter it absolutely must go
oﬀ. If it's not going to be ﬁred, it shouldn't be hanging there.
A story feels incomplete if characters and ideas from early on don't reappear. I only really
thought about this principle halfway through the writing of Murphy's Quest, which makes the
whole story feel incomplete.
Reincorporating old details is like weaving together narrative threads. Some of my favorite
moments in Murphy's Quest are when earlier characters and occurrences reappear,
especially in surprising ways.
Interrupt Routines. Impro likes to say that every good story should be formed out of a
series of interrupted routines. As the character moves through life, routines and patterns
begin to form. There's a moment when these routines begin to feel stale and constraining to
the writer - this is when it must be broken in a surprising way.
Things Always Get Weird. In Impro, there's a pair-writing exercise where students take
turns writing words of a story. Johnstone says these stories follow four general stages:
Word-at-a-time letters usually go through four stages: (1) the letters are usually cautious
or nonsensical and full of concealed sexual references; (2) the letters are obscene and
psychotic; (3) they are full of religious feeling; (4) ﬁnally, they express vulnerability and
loneliness.

Inspired by Impro, I allowed hints of the sexual and grotesque into Murphy's Quest instead of
keeping it sanitary and lighthearted. I think this was for the best.
3. Constrained Writing
I have ﬂirted with the ideas of the Oulipo and constrained writing ever since I heard about
them (see e.g. Russian Cynicism), but I ﬁnd their exercises unimaginative. The main principle
of constrained writing is:
Freedom is the enemy of creativity.
This is hardly surprising in hindsight: the whole point of creativity is to solve heavily
constrained problems.
On my previous attempts at ﬁction-writing, I didn't constrain myself enough. I wanted to
design all the characters, and do all the world-building, and create interesting new
mythological backstories and value structures in the world. These attempts spiraled out of
control, opening more threads on each page than I could handle.
This time, I decided to buy in wholesale to a known, trope-ﬁlled universe with fairly
straightforward rules and aesthetics. I allowed each piece of exposed information to
constrain the future in a nontrivial way. By Chapter 8, I already knew exactly how the story
had to end; after all, how else could a novel inspired by Murphy's Law with 13 chapters end?
I used to think constraints make writing harder, but the exact opposite is true. If you want to
make ﬁction-writing easier for yourself, add more constraints. Remove more variables. That's
why fan-ﬁction is so easy and fun to write. You follow along the predetermined route,
inserting novelty only when it suits you.

