
Novum Organum
1. Nature's Hidden Processes and Structures (Novum Organum Book 2: 1-9)
2. Tables of Presence, Nearby Absence, & Degrees of Intensity (Novum Organum
Book 2: 10-14)
3. A First Sketch of the Nature of Heat (Novum Organum Book 2: 15-25)
4. Novum Organum: Introduction
5. Novum Organum: Preface
6. The Inadequacy of Current Science (Novum Organum Book 1: 1-37)
7. Idols of the Mind Pt. 1 (Novum Organum Book 1: 38-52)
8. Idols of the Mind Pt. 2 (Novum Organum Book 1: 53-68)
9. 13 Causes of Bad Science (Novum Organum Book 1: 69-92)
10. The Baconian Method (Novum Organum Book 1: 93-107)
11. Reasons for Hope & Objection Preemption (Novum Organum Book 1: 108-130)

Nature's Hidden Processes and
Structures (Novum Organum Book 2:
1-9)
This is the ninth post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see the
sequence introduction. For the reading guide, see earlier posts in the
sequence.
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 2: 1-9
by Francis Bacon
[[Bacon makes a distinction between human power vs human knowledge which may
very roughly analogized as engineering vs science, i.e. being able to do things vs
knowing things.]]
1. What human power does and is intended for is this:
For a given body, to create and give to it a new nature (or new natures)—·e.g.
melting gold or cooking chicken or dissolving salt in water·.
What human knowledge does and is intended for is this:
For a given nature, to discover its form, or true speciﬁc diﬀerentia. . . .
·i.e. the features that a thing must have if it is to qualify as belonging to this or that
natural kind, e.g. the features of gold that diﬀerentiate it from metal in general·.
[Bacon adds two even more obscure technical terms, semi-apologising for them; they
don't occur again in this work. Then:] Subordinate to these primary works are two
secondary and less important ones. Under the 'power' heading: turning concrete
bodies into something diﬀerent, so far as this is possible—·e.g. turning lead into gold,
if this can be done·. Under the 'knowledge' heading:
(i) in every case of generation and motion, discovering the hidden process through
which the end-state form results from the manifest eﬃcient ·cause· and the manifest
material; and
(ii) discovering the hidden microstructure of bodies that are not changing.
·An example of (i): the wax around the wick of a lighted candle melts. Flame is the
eﬃcient cause, wax is the material, and meltedness is the end-state form. But 'ﬂame'
and 'wax' stand for items that are manifest, obvious, out there on the surface; we
know that when you apply one to the other you get melting; but that isn't knowing
what hidden process is involved—what is really basically going on at the sub-
microscopic level when ﬂame melts wax·. ·An example of (ii): discovering what the
sub-microscopic structure is of wax when it isn't melting·.
2. Human knowledge is in a poor state these days—how poor can be seen from things
that are commonly said. ·Not that they are all wrong·.
True knowledge is knowledge by causes. Causes are of four kinds: material,
formal, eﬃcient, and ﬁnal.
[A coin's •material cause is the metal, its •formal cause is the property of being
round-with-a-head-inscribed-on-it etc., its immediate •eﬃcient cause is the stamping
of a die on the metal, and its •ﬁnal cause is its purpose, use in commerce.]
So far, so good; but ·the concept of· ﬁnal cause spoils the sciences rather than
furthering them, except in contexts involving human action. The discovery of formal
causes is despaired of. Eﬃcient and material causes ·are real and solid and important,

but they· are investigated and believed in ·only as they appear on things' surfaces·,
without reference to the hidden process through which the end-state form comes
about; and, taken in that way, they are slight and superﬁcial, and contribute little or
nothing to true and active science. Earlier in this work [1-51] I noted as an error of the
human mind the opinion that to understand what exists you have to look at forms. It's
true that nature really contains only
individual bodies, performing individual pure actions (actus purus) according to a
ﬁxed law;
[Bacon doesn't explain actus purus. In each of its other three occurrences he connects
it with laws, and his meaning seems to be something like: 'the laws governing the
pure actions of individual things, i.e. the things they do because of their own natures
independently of interference from anything else'. If x does A partly because of
inﬂuence from something else y, then x is not purely •active in respect of A because
y's inﬂuence gives A a certain degree of •passivity. From here on, actus purus will be
translated by 'pure action'.]
but in science this law is what we inquire into, discover, and explain; it is at the root of
our theorizing as well as of our practical applications. When I speak ·approvingly· of
'forms', what I'm talking about is this law. . . .; I use the word 'form' because it has
become familiar.
3. If someone knows the cause of a nature such as whiteness or heat in only some
subjects, his •knowledge is incomplete; and if he can produce a certain eﬀect in only
some of the substances that are capable of it, his •power is incomplete. Now eﬃcient
and material causes
are unstable causes, ·i.e. they can't be depended on to act in the same way in
all cases·;
they are nothing but vehicles ·in which the operative hidden structures and
causes are carried·;
they are causes that convey the ·end-state· form in only some cases.
If a man's knowledge is conﬁned to them, he may arrive at new discoveries ·that hold
generally about· some pre-selected class of fairly similar substances; but he doesn't
get to the ﬁxed, deeper boundaries of things—·'ﬁxed' in contrast to the 'unstable'
nature of manifest causes·. But someone who knows forms gets hold of the unity of
nature in things that are ·superﬁcially· most unalike, and this enables him to discover
and bring to light really new things—things that no-one would ever have thought of,
and that would never have come to light in the course of nature, or through deliberate
experiments, or even by accident. So the discovery of forms leads to truth in theory-
building and freedom in operation.
4. The roads to human power and to human knowledge lie extremely close together
and are nearly the same. Still, because of the bad old habit of thinking in terms of
abstractions, it is safer to get the sciences started and to carry them on from
foundations that have to do with their practical part, and to let the practical part itself
be a stamp of authenticity and also a limit-setter for the purely theoretical part. Well,
then, let's think about a man who wants to confer some nature on a given body; he
wants, for instance, to give a piece of silver the yellow colour that gold has or to make
it heavier (subject to the laws of matter), or he wants to make an opaque stone
transparent, or to make glass sticky, or to get something that isn't a plant to grow. Our
question should be: what kind of rule or direction or guidance should he most wish

for? And we should answer this in the simplest and plainest terms ·that we can ﬁnd·.
(1) He will undoubtedly want to be shown something that won't let him down or fail
when it is put to the test. (2) He will want a rule that won't tie him down to this or that
particular means and mode of operation. Otherwise he may be stuck: he doesn't have
the prescribed means, others are available and would do the job, but the rule he is to
follow doesn't allow them. (3) He will want to be shown a procedure that isn't as
diﬃcult as the thing he wants to do—·e.g. he won't want to be told 'To make that
silver yellow like gold, you must make it yellow like gold'·; he'll want something more
practicable than that.
A true and complete rule of operation, then, will have to be a proposition that is (1)
certain, (2) not constricting and (3) practicable. And the same holds for the discovery
of a true form. For the form of a nature is such that:
given the form, the nature is sure to follow; so that the form is absent whenever
the nature is absent. . . .
and is also such that
if the form is taken away, the nature is sure to vanish; so that the form is
present whenever the nature is present. . . .
[Bacon ties each 'so that. . . ' clause to the wrong proposition—a mere slip, here
corrected, rather than a logical error.]
Lastly,
the true form derives the given nature from some essence that many other also
things have and that is (as they say) better known to nature than the form ·we
are discussing·.
[In calling something 'known to nature' Bacon means that it is a general law of nature;
'better known by nature' could mean 'a more general law of nature' or 'a generality
that is more completely lawlike'.]
Here, then, is the procedure that I urge you to follow to get a true and perfect axiom
of knowledge concerning a nature N₁: discover some other nature N₂ that is
•convertible with N₁ and is •a special case of some more general nature N₃, falling
under it as ·a true species falls· under a true and real genus. Now these two directions,
the active ·rule of operation· and the contemplative ·rule of discovery·, are one and
the same thing; what is most useful in operation is what is most true in knowledge.
5. There are two kinds of rule or axiom for the transformation of bodies. The ﬁrst
regards a body as a company or collection of simple natures. In gold, for example, the
following properties meet:
it is yellow in colour,
it is heavy up to a certain weight,
it is malleable and ductile up to a certain length,
it doesn't vaporize or lose any of its substance through the action of ﬁre,
it turns into a liquid with a certain degree of ﬂuidity;
it is separated and dissolved by such-and-such means;
and so on for the other natures that come together in gold. This ·ﬁrst· kind of axiom
derives the thing from the forms of its simple natures. Someone who knows •the

forms of yellowness, weight, ductility, ﬁxity, ﬂuidity, dissolving and so on, and •the
methods for giving them to bodies, and •their intensities and varieties, will work to
have them come together in some body which will thereby be transformed into gold.
This kind of operation pertains to the primary kind of action; ·the fact that it involves
many natures doesn't mean that it is a later, non-basic kind of event·. For the principle
of generating many simple natures is the same as that of generating just one; except
that the investigator is more tightly constrained if more than one nature is involved,
because of the diﬃculty of bringing together so many natures that don't easily
combine except in the well-trodden ordinary paths of nature. Anyway, ·despite that
drawback· it must be said that this mode of operation that looks to simple natures in a
compound body starts from what in nature is constant and eternal and universal,
·namely natures·, and opens broad roads to human power—ones that in the present
state of things human thought can scarcely take in.
The second kind of axiom depends on the discovery of hidden processes. It doesn't
start oﬀ from simple natures, but from compound bodies just as they are found in the
ordinary course of nature. For example, one might be inquiring into the origins of gold
or some other metal or stone—How does it start forming? What process takes it from
its basic rudiments or elements right through to the completed mineral? Or, similarly,
the question of how plants are generated—What process takes the plant from the ﬁrst
congealing of sap in the ground, or from seeds, right through to the formed plant. . . .?
Similarly ·we might inquire into· the process of development in the generation of
animals from the beginning right through to birth; and similarly with other bodies.
This investigation concerns not only the •generation of bodies but also other motions
and operations of nature. For example, we can inquire into •nutrition, the whole
continuous series of events leading from the swallowing of the food through to its
complete assimilation. Or into •voluntary motion in animals, from the ﬁrst impression
on the imagination and the continuous eﬀorts of the spirits through to the ﬂexing and
moving of limbs. Or into •what is involved in the motion of the tongue and lips and
other organs right through to the uttering of articulate sounds. Each of these inquiries
relates to natures that have been concretized, i.e. brought together into a single
structure; they concern what may be called particular and special practices of nature,
not its basic and universal laws that constitute forms. ·That drawback of this approach
is balanced by an advantage that it has over the other·. It has to be admitted that this
second approach seems to have less baggage and to lie nearer at hand and to give
more ground for hope than the ﬁrst approach, ·i.e. the one described ﬁrst in this
aphorism·.
The practical-experimental approach corresponding to this ·second· theoretical
approach starts from ordinary familiar natural events and moves on from them to
ones that are very like them or at least not too unlike. But ·the merits of the ﬁrst
approach mustn't be forgotten·. Any deep and radical operations on nature depend
entirely on the primary axioms, ·which are the business of the ﬁrst approach·. And
then there are the matters where we have no power to operate but only to know, for
example the heavenly bodies (for we can't operate on them, alter them, or turn them
into something else). With these things, whether we are investigating the facts about
what happens in the heavens or trying to understand why it happens, we have to
depend on the primary and universal axioms concerning simple natures, such as the
nature of spontaneous rotation, of attraction or magnetism, and of many others that
apply to more things than just to the heavenly bodies. 'Does the earth rotate daily, or
do the heavens revolve around it?' Don't think you have a hope of answering this
before you have understood the nature of spontaneous rotation.

6. The hidden process of which I speak is utterly diﬀerent from anything that would
occur to men in the present state of the human mind. For what I understand by it is
not
the diﬀerent stages—diﬀerent •steps—that bodies can be •seen to go through in
their development,
but rather
a perfectly •continuous process which mostly •escapes the senses.
For instance: in all generation and transformation of bodies, we must inquire into
what is lost and escapes, what remains, what is added;
what is expanded, what is contracted;
what is united, what is separated;
what is continued, what is cut oﬀ;
what pushes, what blocks;
what predominates, what gives way;
and a variety of other particulars. And it's not just with the generation or
transformation of bodies, but with all other alterations and motions we should inquire
into
what goes before, what comes after;
what is quicker, what is slower;
what produces motion, what ·merely· guides it;
and so on. In the present state of the sciences (in which stupidity is interwoven with
clumsiness) no-one knows or does anything about any of these matters. For seeing
that every natural action takes place
Latin: per minima
possibly meaning: by means of the smallest particles
or it might mean: by smallest steps, i.e. continuously
or at least by ones that are too small to strike the senses, no-one can hope to govern
or change nature unless he understands and observes such action in the right way.
7. Similarly, the investigation and discovery of the hidden •microstructure in bodies is
something new, as new as the discovery of the hidden •process and of the •form. At
this time we are merely lingering in nature's outer courts, and we aren't preparing a
way into its inner chambers. Yet no-one can give a body a new nature, or successfully
and appropriately turn it into a new ·kind of· body without ﬁrst getting a competent
knowledge of the body so to be altered or transformed. Without that, he will run into
methods that are worthless or at best cumbersome and wrongly ordered and
unsuitable to the nature of the body he is working on. So that is clearly another road
that must be opened up and fortiﬁed.
It's true that some good useful work has been done on the anatomy of organized
bodies such as men and animals; it seems to have been done subtly and to have been
a good search of nature. [The phrase 'organized bodies' refers to organisms; but the
adjective 'organized' emphasizes the idea of a body with diﬀerent parts of diﬀerent

kinds, unlike such seemingly homogeneous bodies as lumps of lead.] But this kind of
anatomizing lies within the visible range and is subject to the senses; also, it applies
only to organized bodies. And it's obvious and easy compared with the true
anatomizing of the hidden microstructure in bodies that are thought to be the same all
through, ·i.e. homogeneous·; especially in things (and their parts) that have a speciﬁc
character, such as iron and stone; and homogeneous parts of plants and animals,
such as the root, the leaf, the ﬂower, ﬂesh, blood, bones and so on. But there has
been some human industry even on this kind of thing; because this is just what men
are aiming at when they break up homogeneous bodies by means of distillation and
other kinds of analysis so as to reveal how the complex structure ·of the seemingly
homogeneous compound· comes from combination of its various homogeneous parts.
This is useful too, and is the kind of thing I am recommending; but in practice it often
gives the wrong answer, because the procedures that are used—ﬁre, heat, and so on
—sometimes create new natures, which the scientist thinks existed in the compound
before and were merely brought into the open by the separation procedure. Anyway,
this is only a small part of the work of discovering the true microstructure of the
compound body—a structure that is far more subtle and detailed ·than these
processes could discover·. The operation of ﬁre doesn't reveal and clarify this
structure—it scrambles it.
So the way to separate and analyse bodies is not by ﬁre but by reasoning and true
induction, with experiments in a helping role; and by comparison with other bodies,
and reduction to simple natures and their forms which meet and mix in the
compound. In short, we must pass from Vulcan to Minerva—·from physical activities to
intelligent mental ones·—if we want to bring to light the true •textures and
•microstructures of bodies. It is on •these that depend all the hidden properties and
powers of things, and all their so-called speciﬁc properties and powers. They are also
the source of every eﬀective alteration and transformation. For example, we must
inquire what each body contains in the way of •spirit, and what of •tangible stuﬀ; and
regarding the spirit we should inquire into whether it is
plentiful (making the body swollen) or meagre and scarce;
ﬁne or coarse,
more like air than like ﬁre, or vice versa,
vigorous or sluggish,
weak or strong,
increasing or decreasing,
broken up or continuous,
agreeing or disagreeing with objects in the external environment,
and so on. Similarly, we must inquire into the tangible stuﬀ (which is just as variable
as spirit)—into its hairs, its ﬁbres, its kinds of texture. Other things that fall within the
scope of this inquiry are: •how the spirit is distributed through the bodily mass, with
its pores, passages, veins and cells; and •the rudiments or ﬁrst attempts at organic
body. In these inquiries, and thus in all discoveries relating to hidden microstructure,
the primary axioms cast a true and clear light which entirely dispels darkness and
subtlety.
8. ·Three fears that you might have can be allayed·:
(1) This won't lead us to the doctrine of atoms, which presupposes •that there is a
vacuum and •that matter doesn't change—which are both false. All we shall be led to
are real particles—which ·are not merely hypothesized but· have been discovered.

(2) Don't be afraid that all this will be so subtle—·so complex and ﬁne-grained in its
detail·—that it will become unintelligible. On the contrary, the nearer our inquiry gets
to simple natures the more straightforward and transparent everything will become.
The whole aﬀair will be a matter of getting
from the complicated to the simple,
from the incommensurable to the commensurable,
from the random to the calculable,
from the inﬁnite and vague to the ﬁnite and certain,
like the case of the letters of the alphabet and the notes of music. Inquiries into nature
have the best result when they begin with physics and end in mathematics.
(3) Don't be afraid of large numbers or tiny fractions. In dealing with numbers it is as
easy to write or think a thousand or a thousandth as to write or think one.
9. From the two kinds of axioms that I have spoken of [5] arises a sound division of
philosophy and the sciences. The investigation of forms, which are. . . .eternal and
immutable, constitutes Metaphysics; the investigation of eﬃcient causes, of matter,
of hidden processes and of hidden microstructures—all of which concern the common
and ordinary course of nature, not its eternal and fundamental laws—constitutes
Physics. Each of these has a subordinate practical branch: physics has mechanics;
and metaphysics has what in a cleaned-up sense of the word I call magic, on account
of its sweeping ways and its greater command over nature. 'Metaphysics' etc. are the
most accurate labels for these categories, but I am understanding them in senses that
agree with my views.
The next post in the sequence will be posted Thursday, October 31 at latest by
4:00pm PT.

Tables of Presence, Nearby Absence,
& Degrees of Intensity (Novum
Organum Book 2: 10-14)
This is the tenth post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see the
sequence introduction. For the reading guide, see earlier posts in the
sequence.
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
[[Bacon has begun demonstrating his scientiﬁc method in earnest. He uses the
investigation of the nature of heat as his example. He explains that his approach
works by compiling a natural history, i.e., data related to phenomena of interested
which he arranges into three tables:
1) A table of presence which lists many examples where phenomena of interest in
presence, e.g. many examples of things where we have heat. Bacon is quite thorough.
2) A table of nearby essence. To discriminate the true cause of heat, Bacon looks for
examples of things that resemble those in the table of presence yet are lacking the
heat. For the example, the light of the moon (cold) is contrasted with the light of the
sun (hot) which is interesting given they are both heavenly bodies.
3) A table of degrees or comparison where are examples are brought where the
amount of perceived heat diﬀers in degree between things. This is also useful in
discriminating the true underlying cause and and nature of heat.
Bacon is thorough in his examples here, listing an extreme variety of things. To his
credit, he eventually hits upon that heat is about motion.
One the hand, these passages can be see as boring, but I see them as quite
fascinating- it's remarkable to see how on the earlier pioneers of modern science
thought and approached solving what to him was a great mystery. He did not rush, he
did not get bored, instead he painstakingly collected his data. A superb demonstration
of empiricism.]]

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 2: 10-
14
10. Having looked at doctrines, we must go on to precepts, dealing with them in the
most direct way and not getting things the wrong way around. Guides for the
interpretation of nature are of two fundamental kinds: (1) how to draw or fetch up
axioms from experience; (2) how to get from axioms to new experiments. Precepts of
kind (1) divide into three kinds of service: (i) catering to the senses, (ii) catering to
the memory, and (iii) catering to the mind or reason. (i) First of all we must prepare an
adequate and sound natural and experimental history, this being the basis for
everything, for we are not to •imagine or •suppose but to •discover what nature
makes or does. [Bacon doesn't return to (ii) memory.] (iii) But natural and
experimental history is so various and diﬀuse that it confuses and scatters the
intellect unless it is kept short and set out in a suitable order. So we must create
tables and arrangements of instances that are done in such a way that the intellect
can act on them. And even when this is done, the unaided and unguided intellect
hasn't the competence to form axioms. Therefore in the third place we must use
induction, true and legitimate induction, which is the very key of interpretation. But I
must deal ﬁrst with this ·induction·, though it comes last, and then I shall go back to
the others.
[In fact, all the rest of the work has to do with what Bacon calls 'induction'.]
11. The investigation of forms proceeds in this way: For a given nature, we must ﬁrst
turn our minds to all known instances that agree in having this nature (they'll diﬀer
greatly in other ways). This collection is to be made in the manner of a ·natural·
history, with no rush to theorize about it and with no great amount of subtlety. If for
example we are to investigate the form of heat, we need a table of instances of
heat. This is my First Table:
1. The rays of the sun, especially in summer and at noon.
2. The sun's rays reﬂected and condensed. . . .especially in burning glasses and
mirrors.
3. Fiery meteors.
4. Lightning.
5. Eruptions of ﬂame from the cavities of mountains.
6. All ﬂame.
7. Burning solids.
8. Natural warm baths.
9. Hot or boiling liquids.

10. Hot vapours and fumes, and even air that becomes furiously hot if it is conﬁned,
as in reverbatory furnaces.
11. Weather that is clear and bright just because of the constitution of the air, without
reference to the time of year.
12. Air that is conﬁned and underground in some caverns, especially in winter.
13. All shaggy substances—wool, skins of animals, down of birds—have some warmth.
14. All bodies, whether solid or liquid, dense or rare (as air is), held for a time near a
ﬁre.
15. Sparks from ﬂint and steel that are struck hard.
16. All bodies—stone, wood, cloth, etc.—when rubbed strongly (axles of wheels
sometimes catch ﬁre; and rubbing was how they kindled ﬁre in the West Indies).
17. Green and moist plants jammed together, as roses or peas in baskets (hay in a
damp haystack often catches ﬁre).
18. Quicklime sprinkled with water.
19. Iron when ﬁrst dissolved in aqua fortis [= nitric acid] in a test tube without being
put near a ﬁre (the same with tin, though not with the same intensity).
20. Animals, especially their insides (and always their insides), though we don't feel
the heat in insects because they are so small.
21. Freshly dropped horse dung and other animal excrements.
22. Strong oil of sulphur and of vitriol has the eﬀect of heat when it scorches linen.
23. Oil of marjoram and similar oils have the eﬀect of heat in burning the bones of the
teeth.
24. Strong alcohol acts as though it were hot: it makes egg-white congeal and turn
white, as though it were cooked; it makes bread crusty, like toast.
25. Aromatic and hot herbs. . . .although not warm to the hand. . . .feel hot to the
palate when they are chewed.
26. When strong vinegar or any acid is applied to parts of the body that don't have
skin—the eye, the tongue, or on any part that has been damaged and lost some skin
—it produces a pain like the pain heat produces.
27. Even keen and intense cold produces a kind of sensation of burning. . . .
28. Other instances.
I call this the Table of Essence and Presence.
12. Secondly, we must turn our minds to instances where the given nature is lacking,
because—as I said above—the form should not only be present when the given nature
is present but also be absent when the nature is absent. But a list of these would be
endless! So the negatives should be linked with the aﬃrmatives: we shall look into the

absence of the given nature only in things that are most like ones where the nature is
present and apparent. I call this, which is my Second Table, the Table of Divergence
or of Nearby Absence. These are instances where the nature of heat is absent but
which are in other ways close to ones where it is present.
[Each tag of the form #n means that the topic is negative instances that are nearby to
positive instance n.]
1. (#1) The rays of the moon and of stars and comets are not found to be hot to the
touch; indeed the severest colds are experienced at the full moons. The larger ﬁxed
stars, however, when passed or approached by the sun, are thought to increase and
intensify the heat of the sun. . . .
2. (#2) The rays of the sun in the so-called 'middle region' of the air don't give heat.
(The usual explanation for this is pretty good: namely, that region is far enough away
from the body of the sun that gives oﬀ the rays and from the earth that reﬂects them.)
And this appears from the fact that on mountain-tops there is perpetual snow, unless
they are very high: it has been observed that on the Peak of Tenerife and among the
Andes of Peru the summits of the mountains are free from snow though there is snow
a little way below the summits. Actually, the air at the very top is not found to be at all
cold, but only thin and sharp—so much so that in the Andes it pricks and hurts the
eyes by its excessive sharpness and also irritates the entrance to the stomach,
producing vomiting. The ancients observed that on the summit of Olympus the air was
so thin that those who climbed it had to carry sponges with them dipped in vinegar
and water, and to apply them from time to time to the mouth and nose, because the
air was too thin to support respiration. They also reported that on this summit the air
was so serene, and so free from rain and snow and wind, that words written by the
ﬁnger in the ashes of a sacriﬁce were still there, undisturbed, a year later. . . .
3. (#2) The reﬂection of the sun's rays in regions near the polar circles is found to be
very weak and ineﬀective in producing heat: the Dutch who wintered in Nova Zembla
and expected their ship to be freed by the beginning of July from the mass of ice that
hemmed it in were disappointed in their hopes and forced to take to their row-boats. It
seems, then, that the direct rays don't have much power, even down at sea level; and
don't reﬂect much either, except when they are many of them combined. That is what
happens when the sun moves high in the sky, for then the incident rays meet the
earth at acuter angles, so that the lines of the rays are nearer each other; whereas
when the sun ·is lower in the sky and so· shines very obliquely, the angles are very
obtuse which means that the lines of rays are further from one another. Meanwhile,
bear in mind that the sun may do many things, including ones that involve the nature
of heat, that don't register on our sense of touch—things that we won't experience as
detectable warmth but that have the eﬀect of heat on some other bodies.
4. (#2) Try the following experiment. Take a glass made in the opposite manner to an
ordinary burning glass, let the sun shine through it onto your hand, and observe
whether it •lessens the heat of the sun as a burning glass •increases and intensiﬁes it.
It's quite clear what happens with optical rays ·shone through a glass·: according as
the middle of the glass is thicker or thinner than the sides, the objects seen through it
appear more spread or more contracted. Well, see whether the same holds for heat.
5. (#2) Try to ﬁnd out whether by means of the strongest and best built burning
glasses the rays of the moon can be caught and collected in such a way as to produce
some warmth, however little. In case the warmth produced is too weak to be detected
by the sense of touch, use one of those glasses that indicate the state of the

atmosphere in respect to heat and cold: let the moon's rays fall through the ·extra-
powerful· burning glass onto the top of a glass of this kind, and then see whether the
water sinks because of warmth.
[The 'glasses' in question are thermometers; see item 38 for Bacon's instructions on
how to make and use one.]
6. (#2) Try a burning glass with a source of heat that doesn't emit rays or light—such
as iron or stone that has been heated but not ignited, or boiling water, or the like.
Observe whether the burning glass produces an increase of the heat as it does with
the sun's rays.
7. (#2) Try a burning glass also with ordinary ﬂame.
8. (#3) Comets (if we are to count these as meteors) aren't found to exert a constant
and detectable eﬀect in increasing the heat of the season, though they have been
seen often to be followed by droughts. Moreover bright beams and pillars and
openings in the heavens appear oftener in winter than in summertime, especially
during the intensest cold but always accompanied by dry weather. (#4) Lightning-
ﬂashes and thunderclaps seldom occur in the winter, but rather at times of great heat.
So-called 'falling stars' are commonly thought to consist of some thick and highly
incandescent liquid rather than to be of any strong ﬁery nature. But this should be
further looked into.
9. (#4) Certain ﬂashes give light but don't burn; and these always come without
thunder.
10. (#5) Discharges and eruptions of ﬂame occur just as frequently in cold as in warm
countries, e.g. in Iceland and Greenland. In cold countries, too, many of the trees—
e.g. ﬁr, pine and others—are more inﬂammable, more full of pitch and resin, than the
trees in warm countries. This is an aﬃrmative instance ·of heat·; I can't associate it
with a ·nearby· negative instance because not enough careful work has been done on
the locations and soil-conditions in which eruptions of this kind usually occur.
11. (#6) All ﬂame, always, is more or less warm; there are no ·nearby· negative
instances to be cited here. [Bacon then cites seven kinds of situation in which there
are something like ﬂames but little if any detected heat. He says, for example, that a
sweaty horse when seen at night is faintly luminous. Then:]
12. (#7) Every body that is subjected to heat that turns it to a ﬁery red is itself hot,
even if there are no ﬂames; there are no ·nearby· negative instances to go with this
aﬃrmative. . . .
13. (#8) Not enough work has been done on the locations and soil-conditions in which
warm baths usually arise; so no ·nearby· negative instance is cited.
14. (#9) To boiling liquids I attach the negative instance of liquid in its own nature. We
don't ﬁnd any tangible liquid that is warm in its own nature and remains so constantly;
the warmth always comes from something outside the liquid and is possessed by the
liquid only temporarily. The water in natural warm baths ·is not inherently warm; when
it· is taken from its spring and put into a container, it cools down just like water that
has been heated on a ﬁre. The liquids whose power and way of acting makes them the
hottest and that eventually burn—e.g. alcohol, chemical oil of spices, oil of vitriol and
of sulphur, and the like—are at ﬁrst cold to the touch; though oily substances are less

cold to the touch than watery ones, oil being less cold than water, as silk ·is less cold·
than linen. But this belongs to the Table of Degrees of Cold.
15. (#10) Similarly, to hot vapour I attach the negative instance of the nature of
vapour itself as we experience it. For although the vapours given oﬀ by oily
substances are easily ﬂammable, they aren't found to be warm unless they have only
recently been given oﬀ by a body that is warm.
16. (#10) Similarly, to hot air I attach the negative instance of the nature of air itself.
For in our regions we don't ﬁnd any air that is warm, unless it has either been conﬁned
or subjected to friction or obviously warmed by the sun, ﬁre, or some other warm
substance.
17. (#11) I here attach the negative instance of weather that is colder than is suitable
for the season of the year, which in our regions occurs during east and north winds;
just as we have weather of the opposite kind with the south and west winds. . . .
18. (#12) Here I attach the negative instance of air conﬁned in caverns during the
summer. But air in conﬁnement is something that needs to be looked into more
carefully ·than has so far been done·. For one thing, it isn't certain what is the nature
of air in itself in relation to heat and cold. It's clear that air gets warmth from the
inﬂuence of the heavenly bodies, and cold perhaps from the exhalations of the earth
and in the so-called 'middle region' of air from cold vapours and snow. So that we
can't form an opinion about the nature of air by examining the open air that is all
around us; but we might do better by examining it when conﬁned. But the air will
have to be conﬁned in something that won't communicate warmth or cold to the air
from itself, and won't easily let the outer atmosphere aﬀect the conﬁned air. So do an
experiment using an earthenware jar wrapped in many layers of leather to protect it
from the outer air; let the vessel remain tightly closed for three or four days; then
open it and test the level of heat or cold either by touch or by a thermometer.
19. (#13) There's also a question as to whether the warmth in wool, skins, feathers
and the like comes from •a faint degree of heat that they have because they came
from animals, or from •some kind of fat or oil that has a nature like warmth; or simply
(as I suggested in the preceding paragraph) from •the air's being conﬁned and
segregated. For all air that is cut oﬀ from the outer air seems to have some warmth.
So: try an experiment with ﬁbres made of linen, not of such animal products as wool,
feathers or silk. It is also worth noting that when something is ground to a powder, the
powder (which obviously has air enclosed in it) is less cold than the intact substance
from which it was made; and in the same way I think that all froth (which contains air)
is less cold than the liquid it comes from.
20. (#14) I don't attach any negative to this because everything around us, whether
solid or gaseous, gets warm when put near ﬁre. They diﬀer in this way, though: some
substances (such as air, oil and water) warm up more quickly than others (such as
stone and metal). But this belongs to the Table of Degrees.
21. (#15) I don't attach any negative to this either, except that it should be noted that
•sparks are produced from ﬂint and iron and the like only when tiny particles are
struck oﬀ from the substance of the stone or metal; that •you can't get sparks by
whirling something through the air, as is commonly supposed; and that •the sparks
themselves, owing to the weight of the body from which they are struck, tend
downwards rather than upwards, and when they are extinguished they become a
tangible sooty substance.

22. (#16) I don't think there is any negative to attach to this instance. For every solid
body in our environment clearly becomes warmer when it is rubbed; so that the
ancients thought (dreamed!) that the heavenly bodies' only way of gaining heat was
by their rubbing against the air as they spun. On this subject we must look into
whether bodies discharged from ·military· engines, such as cannon-balls, don't acquire
some heat just from the blast, so as to be found somewhat warm when they fall. But
moving air chills rather than warms, as appears from wind, bellows, and blowing with
the lips close together. It isn't surprising that this sort of motion doesn't generate
heat: it isn't rapid enough, and it involves a mass moving ·all together· rather than
particles ·moving in relation to one another·.
23. (#17) This should be looked into more thoroughly. It seems that green and moist
grass and plants have some heat hidden in them, but it is so slight that it isn't
detectable by touch in any individual ·carrot or cabbage·. But then a lot of them are
collected and shut up together, their gases aren't sent out into the atmosphere but
can interact with one another, producing palpable heat and sometimes ﬂame.
24. (#18) This too needs to looked into more thoroughly. For quicklime sprinkled with
water seems to become hot either •by the concentration of heat that was previously
scattered (as in the (23) case of conﬁned plants) or •because the ﬁery gas is excited
and roughed up by the water so that a struggle and conﬂict is stirred up between
them. Which of these two is the real cause will appear more readily if oil is poured on
·the quicklime· instead of water; for oil will concentrate the enclosed gases just as well
as water does, but it won't irritate it in the same way. We should also broaden the
experiment •by employing the ashes and cinders of bodies other than quicklime, and
dousing them with liquids other than water.
25. (#19) The negative that I attach to this instance is: other metals, ones that are
softer and more fusible. When gold leaf is dissolved in aqua regia it gives no heat to
the touch; nor does lead dissolved in nitric acid; nor again does mercury (as I
remember), though silver does, and copper too (as I remember); tin still more
obviously; and most of all iron and steel, which not only arouse a strong heat when
they dissolve but also a vigorous bubbling. So it seems that the heat is produced by
conﬂict: the aqua fortis penetrates the substance, digging into it and tearing it apart,
and the substance resists. With substances that yield more easily hardly any heat is
aroused.
26. (#20) I have no negative instances to attach to the heat of animals, except for
insects (as I have remarked) because of their small size. Fish are found to have less
heat than land animals do, but not a complete absence of heat. Plants have no heat
that can be felt by touch, either in their sap or in their pith when freshly opened up.
The heat in an animal varies from one part of it to another (there are diﬀerent degrees
of heat around the heart, in the brain, and on the skin) and also from one event to
another—e.g. ·the animal's heat increases· when it engages in strenuous movements
or has a fever.
27. (#21) It's hard to attach a negative to this instance. Indeed animal dung obviously
has potential heat ·even· when no longer fresh; this can be seen from how it enriches
the soil.
28. (#22 and #23) Liquids, whether waters or oils, that are intensely caustic act as
though they were hot when they break into bodies and, after a while, burn them; but
they don't feel hot at ﬁrst. But how they operate depends on what they are operating

on. . . . Thus, aqua regia dissolves gold but not silver; nitric acid dissolves silver but
not gold; neither dissolves glass, and so on with others.
29. (#24) Try alcohol on wood, and also on butter, wax and pitch; and observe
whether it has enough heat to melt any of them. For 24 shows it exhibiting a power
that resembles heat in making bread crusty. Also, ﬁnd out what it can do in the way of
liquefying substances. Experiment with a thermometer or calendar glass, hollow at
the top; pour some well-distilled alcohol into the hollow; cover it so that the spirit
keeps its heat better; and observe whether by its heat it makes the water go down. [A
'calendar glass' is a thermometer. See item 38].
30. (#25) Spices and sharp-tasting herbs are hot to the palate and much hotter to the
stomach. So we should see on what other substances they act as though they were
hot. (Sailors report that when large quantities of spices are kept shut up tightly for a
long time and then suddenly opened, those who ﬁrst disturb and take them out are at
risk of fever and inﬂammation.) Something else that can be tested: whether such
spices and herbs in a powdered form will dry bacon and meat hung over them, as
smoke does.
31. (#26) Cold things such as vinegar and oil of vitriol are corrosive and penetrating,
just as are hot things such as oil of marjoram and the like. Both alike cause pain in
living things, and tear apart and consume things that are inanimate. There is no
negative to attach to this ·positive· instance. A further point: whenever an animal feels
pain it has a certain sensation of heat.
[A warning about 'inanimate': it translates non animatus, which strictly means 'not
breathing', and Bacon often uses it to cover plants as well as things that are
'inanimate' in our sense. This version will stay with 'inanimate' except in one place
where 'non-animal' is required.]
32. (#27) In many contexts heat and cold have the same eﬀect, though for diﬀerent
reasons. Boys ﬁnd that after a while snow seems to burn their hands; cold preserves
meat from going rotten just as ﬁre does; and heat makes bodies shrink, which cold
does also. But these and similar instances are better dealt with in the investigation of
cold.
13. ·We have dealt with ﬁrstly (11) a Table of Essence and Presence, secondly (12) a
Table of Divergence or of Nearby Absence. Now·, thirdly, we must turn our minds to
instances in which the nature being investigated is found in diﬀerent degrees, greater
or lesser; either by comparing the amounts of it that a single thing has at diﬀerent
times or by comparing the amounts of it that diﬀerent things have. The •form of a
thing is the very •thing itself; the only diﬀerence between the thing and the form is
just that between
the thing and the form
is just that between
the apparent and the real,
the external and the internal, or
the thing in reference to man and the thing in reference to the universe.
From this is rigorously follows that no •nature should be accepted as the true •form
unless it—·i.e. the thing whose nature is in question·—always decreases when the

nature decreases, and increases when the nature increases. So I call this—my Third
Table—the Table of Degrees or the Table of Comparison.
Here is my Table of Degrees or of Comparison, in relation to Heat. I start with
substances that contain no degree of heat that can be felt by touch but seem to have
a certain potential heat—a disposition and readiness to be hot. Then I shall move on
to substances that are actually hot—hot to the touch—and to their intensities and
degrees.
1. We don't encounter any solid, tangible things that just are hot in their own natures.
No stone, metal, sulphur, fossil, wood, water or animal carcass is found to be hot. The
water in ·naturally· hot baths seems to be heated by external causes—either by
ﬂames or subterraneous hot material such as is thrown up from Etna and many other
mountains, or by bodies colliding as when iron or tin is ground to powder and heat is
caused. Thus, there is no heat detectable by touch in non-living substances; though
they diﬀer in how cold they are—wood isn't as cold as metal. But that belongs to the
Table of Degrees of Coldness.
2. However, many inanimate substances—such as sulphur, naphtha and oil extracted
from rocks—have a lot of potential heat and are strongly disposed to burst into ﬂame.
3. ·Some· substances that have been hot continue to have some of their former heat
lurking in them. Examples of this are horse dung retaining the heat of the horse, also
lime (and perhaps also ashes and soot) retaining the heat of the ﬁre. . . .
4. As for the vegetable kingdom: no plant or part of a plant (such as sap or pith) is
warm to the human touch. But as I have already remarked, green plants become
warm when they are shut up; and some plants are warm and others cold, this being
detectable by the internal touch ·as I call it· of the palate or stomach, and even to
touch by external parts of the body ·such as the hands·. It takes a little time for this to
develop; we see it at work in poultices and ointments.
5. We don't ﬁnd anything warm to the touch in the parts of animals that have died, or
in parts that they have excreted. Not even horse dung retains its heat unless it is
enclosed and buried. Yet all dung seems to have potential heat, as is seen in how it
enriches the ﬁelds. Similarly, the carcasses of animals have some such hidden
potential heat. A result of this is that in cemeteries where burials take place daily the
earth collects a certain hidden heat which consumes a newly buried body much faster
than pure earth would. . . .
6. Substances that enrich the soil, such as dung of all kinds, chalk, sea sand, salt and
the like, have some disposition to become hot.
7. When anything rots, there are the beginnings of slight heat, but not enough to be
detectable by touch. Even the substances which when they putrefy break up into little
animals (meat, cheese, etc.) don't feel warm to the touch; nor does rotten wood,
which shines in the dark, feel warm to the touch. In rotting substances, though, heat
sometimes announces itself by strong nasty smells.
8. The lowest degree of heat among things that feel warm to the touch seems to be
the heat of animals, which varies over quite a wide range. At the bottom of the scale,
as in insects, the heat is hardly perceptible to the touch; and the highest scarcely
equals the heat the sun gives oﬀ in the hottest countries and seasons, and isn't too
great to be tolerated by the hand. But it is said of Constantius, and of some others

who had a very dry constitution and bodily condition, that in acute fevers they
became so hot as to burn slightly any hand that touched them.
9. Animals increase in heat by motion and exercise, wine and eating, sex, burning
fevers, and pain.
10. When attacked by intermittent fevers, animals are at ﬁrst seized with cold and
shivering, but soon after they become exceedingly hot; and in burning and pestilential
fevers they are very hot right from the start.
11. We should investigate the diﬀerent degrees of heat indiﬀerent ·broad kinds of·
animals, such as ﬁsh, quadrupeds, snakes, birds; and also according to their
·narrower· species, such as lion, vulture, man. ·This would be, among other things, a
check on popular beliefs·. For ﬁsh are generally thought to be the coldest internally,
and birds—especially doves, hawks and sparrows—to be very hot.
12. We should also investigate the diﬀerent degrees of heat in the diﬀerent parts of
the same animal. For milk, blood, semen and ova are found to be only mildly warm—
cooler than the outer ﬂesh of the animal when it is moving or agitated—but no-one
has yet investigated what the temperature is in the brain, stomach, heart, etc.
13. In winter and cold weather all animals are cold externally, but internally they are
thought to be even warmer ·than at other times·.
14. Even in the hottest countries and at the hottest times of the year and day, the
heavenly bodies don't give oﬀ enough heat to kindle a ﬂame in the driest wood or
straw or even cloth, except when the heat is increased by burning glasses. But it can
raise steam from moist matter.
15. Astronomers have a traditional belief that some stars are hotter than others. Of
the planets, Mars is regarded as the hottest after the sun; then comes Jupiter, and
then Venus. The moon is said to be cold and Saturn the coldest of all. Of ﬁxed stars,
Sirius is said to be the hottest, then Cor Leonis (or Regulus), then the Dog-star, and so
on.
16. The sun gives oﬀ more heat the nearer it comes to the perpendicular [= 'to being
straight overhead']; and this is probably true of the other planets also, within their
own ranges of temperature. Jupiter, for instance, feels warmer when it is under Cancer
or Leo than when it is under Capricorn or
17. The sun and the other planets can be expected to give more heat when they are
closest to the earth than when they are furthest away. If it should happen that in some
region the sun is at its closest and also near the perpendicular, it would have to give
oﬀ more heat there than in a region where it is also at its closest but is shining more
obliquely. So there should be a study of ·the heat-eﬀects of· the planets in diﬀerent
regions according to how high or low in the sky they are.
18. The sun and other planets are thought to give more heat when nearer to the
larger ﬁxed stars. When the sun is in ·the constellation· Leo it is nearer to ·the stars·
Cor Leonis, Cauda Leonis, Spica Virginis, Sirius and the Dog-star than when it is in ·the
constellation· Cancer, though in the latter position it is nearer to the perpendicular
·and thus has one factor making for less heat and another making for more·. And we
have to think that the parts of the sky that are furnished with the most stars,
especially big ones, give oﬀ the greatest heat, though it isn't all perceptible to the
touch.

19. Summing up: the heat given oﬀ by the heavenly bodies is increased in three ways
—•by perpendicularity, •by nearness to the earth, and •by the company of stars.
20. The heat of animals, and the heat that reaches us from the heavenly bodies, are
much less than
the heat of a ﬂame (even a gentle one) ,
the heat from a burning body, and
the heat of liquids and the air itself when strongly highly heated by ﬁre.
For the ﬂame of alcohol, even when scattered and not concentrated, is still enough to
set paper, straw, or linen on ﬁre. The heat of animals will never do that, nor will the
sun without a burning-glass.
21. The heat of ﬂames and burning bodies comes in many diﬀerent intensities; but
they haven't been carefully studied, so I can only skim across the surface of this topic.
It seems that the ﬂame of alcohol is the gentlest of all (unless perhaps the will-o'-the-
wisp or the ﬂames or sparks from the sweat of animals are even gentler). Next, I think,
comes the ﬂame from vegetable matter that is light and porous, such as straw, reeds,
and dried leaves—and the ﬂame from hairs or feathers is pretty much the same. Next
perhaps comes ﬂame from wood, especially wood containing little resin or tar. ·There
is a distinction to be made within the class of ﬂames from that kind of wood·: the
ﬂame from small bits of wood such as are commonly tied up in bundles is milder than
the ﬂame from trunks and roots of trees. Anyone can see this in the fact that a ﬁre
fuelled by bundles of twigs and tree-branches is useless in a furnace for smelting iron.
After this, I think, comes ﬂame from oil, tallow, wax and similar fatty and oily
substances that aren't very caustic or corrosive. But the strongest heat comes from
tar and resin, and even more from sulphur, camphor, naphtha, rock oil, and salts (after
the crude matter is discharged), and from their compounds such as gunpowder, Greek
ﬁre (commonly called 'wildﬁre') and its variants, whose heat is so stubborn that it's
hard to extinguish with water.
22. I think that the ﬂame resulting from some imperfect metals is very strong and
piercing; but all these things need to be looked into further.
23. The ﬂame of powerful lightning seems to be stronger than any of those others, for
it has been known to melt wrought iron into drops, which they can't do.
24. In burning bodies too there are diﬀerent degrees of heat, but these haven't been
carefully investigated either. The weakest heat of all, I think, is what comes from the
sort of burning linen wick that we use to start ﬁres with, and from the fuses that are
used in ﬁring cannons. After this comes burning charcoal made from wood or coal. . . .
[In what follows, a single Latin word is rendered sometimes as 'red-hot' and
sometimes as 'burning', according to the context.]
But I think that red-hot metals—iron, copper etc.—are the hottest of all hot
substances. But this needs to be looked into.
25. Some red-hot bodies are found to be much hotter than some ﬂames. Red-hot iron,
for instance, is much hotter and more destructive than ﬂame of alcohol.
26. Of substances that aren't burning but only heated by ﬁre, such as boiling water
and air conﬁned in reverbatory furnaces, some are found to be hotter than many
ﬂames and burning substances.

27. Motion increases heat, as you can see in bellows and by blowing ·hard into your
hand·; so that the way to get a quiet ﬁre to melt one of the harder metals is to take a
bellows to it.
28. Try the following experiment with a burning-glass(I am describing it from memory).
(1) Place a burning-glass nine inches away from a combustible body. (2) Place the
burning-glass at half that distance from the object and then slowly move it back to a
distance of nine inches. You will ﬁnd that the glass doesn't burn or consume as much
of the object in case (1) as it does in case (2). Yet the cone and the focus of the rays
are the same in each; it's the motion that makes the heat more eﬀective.
29. [Omitted. What Bacon wrote doesn't make physical sense.]
30. Things don't burst into ﬂames unless the ﬂames have some empty space in which
to move and play; except for the explosive ﬂame of gunpowder and the like, where
the ﬁre's fury is increased by its being compressed and imprisoned.
31. An anvil gets very hot under the hammer; so if an anvil were made of a thin plate
and were hit with many strong blows from a hammer I would expect it to it become
red-hot. This should be tried.
32. If a burning substance is porous, so that the ﬁre in it has room to move, the ﬁre is
immediately extinguished if its motion is checked by strong compression. For
example, you can immediately extinguish the burning wick of a candle or lamp by
snuﬃng it out with an extinguisher, or burning charcoal or coal by grinding it down
with your foot.
33. The closer something is to a hot body the more heat it gets from it; and this
applies to light as well—the nearer an object is to a light-source the more visible it
becomes.
34. Combining diﬀerent heats increases the ·over-all· heat unless the combining is
done by mixing the hot substances together. For a large ﬁre and a small ﬁre in the
same house give more heat than either alone, but warm water poured into boiling
water cools it.
35. The longer a hot body is applied to something else,the more heat it gives it;
because heat is perpetually being transferred and mixed in with the heat that is
already there, so that amount of heat transferred increases through time. A ﬁre
doesn't warm a room as well in half an hour as it does if continued through a whole
hour. Not so with light: a lamp or candle gives no more light after it has been long
lighted than it did at ﬁrst.
36. Irritation by surrounding cold increases heat, as you can see in ﬁres during a sharp
frost. I think this is not so much because the cold conﬁnes and contracts the heat. . .
.as because it irritates it. ·Another example of such irritation—one that doesn't
concern heat—occurs· when air is forcefully compressed or a stick is forcefully bent; it
doesn't merely rebound back to its initial position but goes further than that. A careful
experiment is needed here: put a stick or some such thing into a ﬂame, and see
whether it isn't burned more quickly at the edge of the ﬂame than at its centre.
37. Things diﬀer greatly in how susceptible to heat they are. Note ﬁrst of all how even
the bodies that are least susceptible of heat are warmed a little by faint heat. Even a
piece of metal warms up a little if held for a while in your hand. So readily and

universally is heat transmitted and aroused—without the warmed body changing its
appearance.
Item 38: How to Make a Thermometer
38. Of all the substances we know, the one that gets and gives heat most readily is
air. You can see this in calendar glasses [ = 'thermometers'], which are made thus.
•Take a glass ﬂask with a rounded belly and a narrow elongated neck;
•attach along its neck a strip of paper marked with as many degrees as you
choose;
•use a ﬂame to warm the ﬂask's belly; then
•turn the ﬂask upside down and lower it—mouth down and belly up—into another
glass vessel containing water. Let the mouth of the inserted ﬂask touch the
bottom of the receiving vessel, with the ﬂask's neck resting lightly on the mouth
of the receiving vessel. (It may help if you apply a little wax to the mouth of the
receiving vessel, but not so as to create a seal. We are going to be dealing with
very light and delicate movements, and we don't want them to be blocked
because air can't pass through.
·There is your equipment; and now here is the experiment·. The air in the ﬂask was
expanded by the heat of the ﬂame; and now it will contract as the ﬂask cools down, so
that eventually the ﬂask will contain the same amount of air as before but in a smaller
space than that of the entire ﬂask. The remaining space in the ﬂask will be ﬁlled with
water from the receiving vessel. You'll see that the colder the day is the more the air
contracts and thus the more water is drawn up into the ﬂask; and the markings on the
ﬂask's neck will let you measure these changes. Air is much more ﬁnely sensitive to
heat and cold than we are with our sense of touch; a ray of sunshine, or the heat of
your breath, not to mention the heat of your hand placed on the top of the glass, will
lower the level of the water by a perceptible amount. Yet I think that animal spirits are
even more sensitive to heat and cold, or would be if they weren't deadened by the
mass of the body.
39. Next to air, the bodies that seem to me most sensitive to heat are ones that have
recently been compressed by cold, such as snow and ice; for it takes only a very
gentle heat to start them melting. Next, perhaps, comes mercury. Then fatty
substances such as oil, butter, etc.; then wood; then water; and lastly stones and
metals, which are slow to heat, especially internally. These ·slow-to-heat substances·,
however, once they are hot, remain so for a long time; so much so that when an
intensely hot brick, stone or piece of iron is plunged into a basin of water it remains
too hot to touch for nearly a quarter of an hour.
40. The less mass a body has the more quickly it grows warm from being near a hot
body; which shows that all heat in our experience is in some way opposed to tangible
matter.
41. To the human sense of touch, heat is a variable and relative thing; tepid water
feels hot to a hand that was cold, and cold to a hand that was hot.
14. From the above tables you can see how impoverished my ·natural· history is. I
have ·frequently· oﬀered, in place of proven history and solid instances, mere
traditions and hearsay. I have always noted the doubtful credibility and authority of
these, ·but that doesn't alter the fact that they represent gaps in my natural history,
which is why· I have often had to resort to saying things like 'Try an experiment' and
'We should inquire'.

The next post in the sequence will be posted Thursday, November 7 at latest by
4:00pm PT.

A First Sketch of the Nature of Heat
(Novum Organum Book 2: 15-25)
This is the eleventh post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see
the sequence introduction. For the reading guide, see earlier posts in the
sequence.
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented
atwww.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
[[In the previous section, Bacon introduced his "three tables": his careful collection of
data and observations that are core to building up his scientiﬁc method.
These tables are:
1) A table of presence which lists many examples where phenomena of interest in
presence, e.g. many examples of things where we have heat.
2) A table of nearby essence. His example is heat and to discriminate its true heat,
Bacon looks for examples of things that resemble those in the table of presence yet
are lacking the heat. For the example, the light of the moon (cold) is contrasted with
the light of the sun (hot) which is interesting given they are both heavenly bodies.
3) A table of degrees or comparison where are examples are brought where the
amount of perceived heat diﬀers in degree between things. This is also useful in
discriminating the true underlying cause and and nature of heat.]]

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 2: 15-
25
15. The job of these three tables is—in the terminology I have chosen—to present
instances to the intellect. After the presentation has been made, induction itself must
get to work. After looking at each and every instance we have to ﬁnd a nature which
is always present when the given nature (in our present case: heat) is present,
is always absent when the given nature is absent,
always increases or decreases with the given nature, and
is a special case of a more general nature
(I mentioned this last requirement in 4). If the mind tries to do this •aﬃrmatively from
the outset (which it always does when left to itself), the result will be fancies and
guesses and ill-deﬁned notions and axioms that have to be adjusted daily. (Unless like
the schoolmen* we choose to ﬁght in defence of error; and in that case how well an
axiom fares will depend ·not on how much truth it contains but· on the ability and
strength of its defender.) It is for God (who designed and gave the forms), and
perhaps also for angels and higher intelligences, to have an immediate •aﬃrmative
knowledge of forms straight away. This is certainly more than man can do. We have to
proceed at ﬁrst through
[[*Schoolmen: Aristotelian scholars.]]
16.
[Bacon will now be likening scientiﬁc procedure to a kind of chemical analysis, in
which various components of a complex liquid are distilled oﬀ by heat, leaving the
residue in which we are interested.]
So we have to subject the nature ·in which we are interested· to a complete
dismantling and analysis, not by ﬁre but by the mind, which is a kind of divine ﬁre.
The ﬁrst task of true induction (as regards the discovery of forms) is to reject or
exclude natures that
are not found in some instance where the given nature is present, or
are found in some instance from which the given nature is absent, or
are found to increase in some instance when the given nature decreases, or
are found to decrease when the given nature increases.
After these rejections and exclusions have been properly made, and all volatile
opinions have been boiled oﬀ as vapour, there will remain at the bottom of the ﬂask
(so to speak) an aﬃrmative form that is solid, true and well deﬁned. It doesn't take
long to say this, but the process of doing it is lengthy and complex. Perhaps I'll
manage not to overlook anything that can help in the task.
17. I have to warn you—and I can't say this too often!—that

When you see me giving so much importance to forms, do not think I am talking
about the 'forms' that you have been used to thinking about.
·Treating my forms as your 'forms' in the present context would be wrong in two
ways·. (1) I'm not talking here about composite forms, the ones in which various
simple natures are brought together in the way the universe brings them together—
the likes of the forms of lion, eagle, rose, gold, and so on. It will be time to treat of
these when we come to hidden processes and hidden microstructures, and the
discovery of them in so-called substances or composite natures.
(2) In speaking of ·forms or· simple natures, I'm not talking about abstract forms and
ideas which show up unclearly in matter if indeed they show up in it at all. When I
speak of 'forms' I mean simply the objective real-world laws of pure action* that
govern and constitute any simple nature—e.g. heat, light, weight—in every kind of
matter and in anything else that is susceptible to them. Thus the 'form of heat' or the
'form of light' is the same thing as the law of heat or the law of light; and I shan't ever
use abstractions through which I step back from things themselves and their
operations.
[*Bacon doesn't explain actus purus. In each of its other three occurrences he
connects it with laws, and his meaning seems to be something like: 'the laws
governing the pure actions of individual things, i.e. the things they do because of their
own natures independently of interference from anything else'. If x does A partly
because of inﬂuence from something else y, then x is not purely •active in respect of
A because y's inﬂuence gives A a certain degree of •passivity. From here on, actus
purus will be translated by 'pure action'.]
[In the next sentence, 'rarity' is cognate with 'rare' in the sense of 'thin, attenuated,
not dense'.] So when I say (for instance) in the investigation of the form of heat
'reject rarity ·from the list of simple natures that constitute heat·', or
'rarity does not belong to the form of heat',
·I may seem to be talking about an abstract property rarity, but what I am saying can
just as well be said without any noun purporting to refer to any such abstraction. For·
those statements are tantamount to
'It is possible for us to make a dense body hot', or
'It is possible for us keep or remove heat from a rare body',
·where 'rarity' and 'denseness' give way to 'rare' and 'dense'·.
You may think that my forms also are somewhat abstract, as they mix and combine
things that are very diﬀerent from one another. ·This complaint might come from your
noticing that·
the heat of heavenly bodies seems to be very unlike the heat of ﬁre,
the relatively durable redness of a rose (say) is very unlike the ·transient
shimmering· redness that appears in a rainbow, an opal, or a diamond, and the
diﬀerent kinds of death—by drowning, burning, stabbing, stroke, starvation—are
very unalike;
yet they share the nature of heat, redness and death respectively. If you do have that
thought, this shows that your mind is captive to •habit, to •things taken as a whole
·and not subject to analysis or bit-by-bit examination·, and to •men's opinions. For it is

quite certain that these things, however unalike they may be, agree in the form or law
that governs heat, redness and death (respectively); and human power can't possibly
be freed from the common course of nature, and expanded and raised to new powers
and new ways of operating, except by discovering of forms of this kind. This •union of
nature is the most important thing I have to talk about; but when I have ﬁnished with
it I shall take up, in the proper place, the •divisions and veins of nature, both the
ordinary ·superﬁcial· ones and also the ones that are more internal and true. ·By the
'union of nature' I mean the coming together of disparate things under a single form.
By the 'division and veins of nature' I mean the complexities in which disparate
structures and functions come together in a single thing·.
18. I should now provide an example of the exclusion or rejection of natures that are
shown by the Tables of Presentation not to belong to the form of heat. All that is
needed for the rejection of any nature ·from the form we are investigating· is a single
·contrary· instance from one of the tables; for what I have said makes it obvious that
any conjecture ·of the type 'Nature N belongs to form F'· is knocked out by a single
contrary instance. But I shall sometimes cite two or three such instances—for clarity's
sake and to provide practice in using the tables.
An example of exclusion or rejection of natures from the form of heat:
(1) reject: elemental nature because of the rays of the sun
(2) reject: heavenly nature because of ordinary ﬁre, and especially underground
ﬁres, which are the most completely cut oﬀ from the rays of heavenly bodies
(3) reject: how ﬁne-grained a body's structure is because of the fact that all kinds of
bodies (minerals, vegetables, skin of animals, water, oil, air, and so on) become warm
simply by being close to a ﬁre or other hot body
(4) reject: being attached to or mixed with another body that is hot because of the
fact that red-hot iron and other metals give heat to other bodies without losing any of
their own weight or substance
(5) reject: light and brightness because of boiling water and ·hot· air, and also
metals and other solids that become hot but not enough to burn or glow
(6) reject: light and brightness because of the rays of the moon and other heavenly
bodies (except the sun)
(7) reject: light and brightness because of the fact that red-hot iron has more heat
and less brightness than the ﬂame of alcohol
(8) reject: rarity because of very hot gold and other metals that have the greatest
density
(9) reject: rarity because of air, which remains rare however cold it becomes
(10) reject: change in a body's size or shape because of red-hot iron, which doesn't
become larger or change its shape
(11) reject: change in a body's size or shape because of the fact that in
thermometers, and the like, air expands without becoming noticeably warmer

(12) reject: destructive nature, or the forceful addition of any new nature because of
the ease with which all bodies are heated without any destruction or noticeable
alteration
(13) reject: expanding or contracting motion of the body as a whole because of the
agreement and conformity of similar eﬀects displayed by both heat and cold
(14) reject: the basic natures of things (as distinct from properties they have through
antecedent causes) because of the creation of heat by rubbing things together There
are other natures beside these; I'm not oﬀering complete tables, but merely
examples.
Not a single one of the 'reject:' natures belongs to the form of heat. In all our dealings
with heat we can set those aside.
19. The process of exclusion is the foundation of true induction; but the induction isn't
completed until it arrives at something aﬃrmative. Of course the excluding part ·of
our work· is itself nothing like complete, and it can't be so at the beginning. For
exclusion is, obviously, the rejection of simple natures; so how can we do it accurately
when we still don't have sound and true notions of simple natures? Some of the
notions that I have mentioned (such as the notions of elemental nature, heavenly
nature and rarity) are vague and ill deﬁned. I'm well aware of, and keep in mind, how
great a work I am engaged in (namely making the human intellect a match for things
and for nature); so I am not satisﬁed with what I have said up to here. I now go
further, and devise and supply more powerful aids for the intellect—aids that I shall
now present. In the interpretation of nature the mind should be thoroughly prepared
and shaped up, so that it will at each stage settle for the degree of certainty that is
appropriate there, while remembering (especially at the beginning) that the answer to
'What is this that we have before us?' depends to a great extent on what will come of
it later on.
20. Truth emerges more quickly from error than from confusion, ·which implies that it
can be worthwhile to aim for clarity even at the risk of going wrong·. So I think it will
be useful, after making and weighing up three tables of ﬁrst presentation (such as I
have exhibited), to give the intellect permission to try for an interpretation of nature
of the aﬃrmative kind on the strength of the instances given in the tables and also of
any others that may turn up elsewhere. I call this kind of attempt •'permission for the
intellect' or •'sketch of an interpretation' or—·the label I shall actually use in this work·
—•the 'ﬁrst harvest'.
A ﬁrst harvest of the form of heat
Something that is perfectly clear from what I have said earlier should be borne in mind
here, namely that the •form of a thing is present in each and every instance of the
thing; otherwise it wouldn't be its •form; from which it follows that there can't be any
counter-instances ·where the thing is present and the form isn't·. Still, the form is
much more conspicuous and obvious in •some instances than in others, namely in
•those where the nature of the form is less restrained and obstructed and limited by
other natures. Instances of •this kind I call 'luminous' or (·most of the time·)
'revealing' instances. So now let us proceed to the ﬁrst harvest concerning the form of
heat.
In each and every case of heat the cause of the nature of which heat is a special
case appears to be motion. This shows most conspicuously in ﬂames, which are
on the move all the time, and in boiling or simmering liquids, which are also

constantly in motion. It is also shown when motion stirs heat up or increases it—as
happens with bellows and with wind (Third Table 29) and with other kinds of
motion (28 and 31). It is also shown when ﬁre and heat are extinguished by any
strong compression, which checks and stops the motion (see 30 and 32). It is
shown also by the fact that all bodies are destroyed or at any rate signiﬁcantly
changed by any ﬁre or strong heat, which makes it quite clear that heat causes a
tumult and agitation and lively motion in the internal parts of a body, which
gradually moves it towards dissolution.
In certain cases heat generates motion and in certain cases motion generates heat,
but that isn't what I am saying when I say that motion is like a genus in relation to
heat ·as one of its species·. What I mean is that heat itself is nothing but motion of a
certain speciﬁc kind; I'll tell you soon what special features of a case of motion make it
qualify as a case of heat. Before coming to that, though I shall present three cautions
that may be needed to avoid unclarity about some of the terms I shall be using.
·First caution: My topic is heat, not heat-as-we-feel-it·. Heat as we feel it is a relative
thing—relative to humans, not to the world; and it is rightly regarded as merely the
eﬀect of heat on the animal spirits. Moreover, in itself it is variable, since a single
body induces a perception of cold as well as of heat, depending on the condition of
the senses. This is clear from the item 41 in the Third Table [here].
·Second caution: My topic is heat, not the passing on of heat·. Don't confuse the form
of heat with the passing on of heat from body to body, for heat is not the same as
heating. Heat is produced by the motion of rubbing something that at ﬁrst has no
heat; and that's enough to show that the transmission of heat is no part of the form of
heat. And even when something is heated by another hot thing's coming close to it,
that doesn't come from the form of heat; rather, it depends entirely on a higher and
more general nature, namely the nature of assimilation or self-multiplication, a subject
that needs to be investigated separately. [See here.]
·Third caution: My topic is heat, not ﬁre·. Our notion of ﬁre is a layman's one, and is
useless ·for scientiﬁc purposes·. What it counts as 'ﬁre' is the combination of heat and
brightness in a body, as in ordinary ﬂame and bodies that are red hot. [Red-heat is
treated as a kind of 'burning' in item 24 here.]
Having guarded against verbal misunderstandings, I now at last come to the true
speciﬁc diﬀerences which qualify a case of •motion (·genus·) to count as a case of
•heat (·species·).
The ﬁrst diﬀerence then is this. Heat is an expansive motion in which a body tries
expand to a greater size than it had before. We see this most clearly in ﬂame, where
the smoke or thick vapour obviously expands into ﬂame.
It also appears in any boiling liquid, which can be seen to swell, rise and bubble, and
goes on expanding itself until it turns into a body that is far bigger than the liquid
itself, namely into steam, smoke, or air.
It appears also in all wood and ·other· ﬂammable things, where there is sometimes
sweating and always evaporation.
It is shown also in the melting of metals. Because they are highly compact, metals
don't easily expand and dilate; but their spirit expands, and wants to expand further;
so it forces and agitates the lumpier parts into a liquid state. If the metal becomes
hotter still, it dissolves and turns much of itself into a volatile substance.

It appears also in iron or rocks: they don't liquefy or run together, but they become
soft. Similarly with wooden sticks, which become ﬂexible when slightly heated in hot
ashes.
But this kind of motion is best seen in air, which a little heat causes to expand—see
Third Table 38 [here].
It shows up also in the contrary nature, namely cold. For cold contracts all bodies—
makes them shrink—so that in a hard frost nails fall out of walls, bronze vessels crack,
and heated glass when exposed to cold cracks and breaks. Similarly, a little cooling
makes air contract, as in 38. But I'll say more about this when I deal properly with
cold.
It's no wonder that heat and cold should exhibit many actions in common (for which
see the Second Table 32). This ﬁrst speciﬁc diﬀerence ·helping to denarcate the
species heat within the genus motion· concerns a feature of heat that is diametrically
opposite to a feature of cold, because whereas heat expands cold contracts; but the
third and fourth diﬀerences (still to come) belong to the natures both of heat and of
cold.
The second diﬀerence is a special case of the ﬁrst, namely: Heat is a motion in which
the hot body •expands while it •rises. This is a case of mixed motion, of which there
are many—e.g. an arrow or javelin •rotates while it •ﬂies forward. Similarly the motion
of heat is an expansion as well as a movement upwards.
This diﬀerence appears when you put a poker into a ﬁre. If you put it in upright and
hold it by the top, it soon burns your hand; if you put it in at the side or from below, it
takes longer to burn your hand.
It can also be seen in fractional distillation, which men use for ·extracting essences
from· delicate ﬂowers that soon lose their scent. It has been found in practice that one
should place the ﬁre not below ·the distilling retort· but above it, so as to burn less.
For all heat, not only ﬂame, tends upward.
This should be tried out on the opposite nature, cold, to learn whether cold contracts a
body downward as heat expands it upward. Here's how to do it. Take two iron rods or
glass tubes of exactly the same dimensions, warm them a little and place a sponge
steeped in cold water or snow at the bottom of the one, and a similar one at the top of
the other. I think that the end of the rod that has snow at the top will cool sooner than
the end of the rod with snow at the bottom—the opposite of what happens with heat.
The third speciﬁc diﬀerence is this: heat is a motion that isn't expansive uniformly
through the whole ·hot· body, but only through its smaller particles; and this
expansion ·in any one particle· is at the same time checked, repelled, and beaten back
·by the expansions of other particles·, so that there's a back-and-forth motion within
the body, which is irritated by all the quivering, straining and struggling that goes on;
and from that comes the fury of ﬁre and heat.
This ·speciﬁc· diﬀerence is most apparent in ﬂames and in boiling liquids, where there
are continual little rises and falls across their surface.
It also shows up in bodies that are so compact that when heated or ignited they don't
swell or expand in bulk—e.g. in red-hot iron, in which the heat is very sharp.
And it is apparent in hearth ﬁres, which burn brightest in the coldest weather.

It also shows in the fact that when the air in a calendar glass [see item 38 here]
expands without obstacles or counter-pressures, and thus expands at the same rate
throughout, there is no perceptible heat. Also when an enclosed body of ·compressed·
air escapes, no great heat is observed; that is because although the air bursts out
with the greatest force, its only expansive motion is a motion of the whole, with no
back-and-forth motions in the particles. . . .
It is also shown in this, that all burning acts on minute pores in the body in question,
so that burning digs into the body, penetrating and pricking and stinging it like the
points of countless needles. . . .
And this third speciﬁc diﬀerence is shared with the nature of cold. For in cold the
contractive motion is checked by a tendency to expand, just as in heat the expansive
motion is checked by a tendency to contract. Thus, whether the particles of a body
work inward or outward, the mode of action is the same though the degree of strength
may be very diﬀerent; because on the surface of the earth we don't have anything
that is intensely cold. [See item (3) here.]
The fourth speciﬁc diﬀerence is a special case of the third. It is that the motion of
pricking and penetrating must be fairly fast, not sluggish, and must go by particles—
very small ones but a bit bigger than the smallest.
This diﬀerence is apparent when you compare the eﬀects of •ﬁre with the eﬀects of
•time or age. Age or time makes things wither, consumes and undermines them,
reduces them to ashes, just as much as ﬁre does, though it acts on even smaller
particles than ﬁre acts on; because that motion is very slow and acts on very tiny
particles, there is no detectable heat.
It is also shown by comparing the dissolution ·in acids· of iron and gold. Gold is
dissolved without any heat being stirred up, whereas iron, when it is dissolved about
as quickly as gold, starts up a violent heat. This is because the solvent for gold enters
the gold gently and works at a level of very small particles, so that the particles of the
gold give way easily; whereas the solvent for iron enters the iron roughly and forcibly,
and the particles of the iron are more stubborn.
It is also apparent in some gangrenes and cases of rotting ﬂesh, which don't arouse
much heat or pain because the rotting process operates at the level of such tiny
particles.
I oﬀer this as the •ﬁrst harvest—or •sketch of an interpretation—concerning the form
of heat, made by way of •permission to the intellect [these three labels are introduced
in 20 here.].
The form or true deﬁnition of heat can be derived from this ﬁrst harvest. (I'm talking
about heat considered absolutely, not heat relative to the senses.) Here it is, brieﬂy:
•Heat is an expansive motion that is resisted, and that ﬁghts its way through the
smaller particles ·of the hot body·.
Special case of this expansion:
•While expanding in all directions ·the hot body· has a tendency to rise.
Special case of the struggle through the particles:

•It is not very slow; rather it is fast and has some force.
This tells us how in practice to create heat. Here is the story:
In some natural body, arouse a motion to expand; and repress this motion and
turn it back on itself so that the expansion doesn't proceed evenly, but partly
succeeds and is partly held back.
If you do that you will undoubtedly generate heat. It makes no diﬀerence whether
•the body is made of earthly elements or contains heavenly substances,
•is luminous or opaque,
•is rare or dense,
•is spatially expanded or still of its original size,
•tends towards dissolution or keeps its original condition,
•is animal, vegetable, or mineral (water, oil or air),
or any other substance that is capable of the motion described. Sensible heat is the
same, but considered with reference to the senses. Let us now proceed to further aids.
[That last remark refers to the 'aids' that were promised in 19 here; the ﬁrst such 'aid'
has been 20. A reminder about 'the tables of ﬁrst presentation':
•the ﬁrst table, of essence and presence, starts here;
•the second table, of divergence or nearby absence, starts here;
•the third table, of degrees or of comparison, starts here;
•'the table of exclusion or rejection' starts here;
•'the ﬁrst harvest' starts here.
This reminder may be useful as a guide to Bacon's next remark.]
21. So much for the tables of •ﬁrst presentation and of •rejection or exclusion, and
the •ﬁrst harvest based on them. Now we have to proceed to the other aids to the
intellect in the interpretation of nature and in true and perfect induction. I'll present
them in terms of heat and cold whenever tables are appropriate; but when only a few
examples are needed I'll take them from all over the place, so as to give my doctrine
as much scope as possible without creating confusion.
[We are about to meet the phrase 'privileged instances'. The Latin praerogativa
instantarum strictly means 'privilege of instances', but Bacon always handles it as
though it stood for a kind of instance, not a kind of privilege. The use of 'privilege' to
translate praerogativa is due to Silverthorne, who relates it to the centuria
praerogativa in ancient republican Rome—the aristocrats' privilege of voting ﬁrst and
thus having the best chance to inﬂuence the votes of others.]
My topics will be, in this order:
1. privileged instances
2. supports for induction
3. the correcting of induction
4. adapting the investigation to the nature of the subject
5. which natures should be investigated ﬁrst, and which later

6. the limits of investigation, or a synopsis of all natures in the universe
7. practical consequences
8. preparations for investigation
9. the ascending and descending scale of axioms.
[There are twenty-seven classes of privileged instances, some with a number of sub-
classes. Bacon's discussion of them runs to the end of the work. The other eight topics
were to have been dealt with in later instalments of the Great Fresh Start, which he
never wrote.]
22. Class 1 of privileged instances: solitary instances. Those are ones in which the
nature we are investigating
appears in things that have nothing else in common with other things that have
that nature,
or ones in which the nature we are investigating
does not appear in things that have everything else in common with other things
that do have that nature.
·I put these ﬁrst · because it is clear that they save us from detours, leading quickly
and securely to exclusions, so that a few solitary instances are as good as many.
Suppose for example that we are investigating the nature of colour: in that context
prisms, crystals, dew-drops and the like, which make colours in themselves and
project them outside themselves onto a wall, are solitary instances. For they have
nothing else in common with the colours inherent in ﬂowers, coloured stones, metals,
woods, etc.—i.e. nothing but colour. From which we can easily draw the conclusion
that colour is merely a modiﬁcation of the light that the object takes in. With prisms,
crystals etc. the light is modiﬁed by the diﬀerent angles at which the light strikes the
body; with ﬂowers, coloured stones etc. it is modiﬁed by various textures and
microstructures of the body. These instances are •resemblance-solitary.
In that same investigation of light: the distinct veins of white and black in a piece or
marble, and the variegation of colour in ﬂowers of the same species, are solitary
instances. The black and white streaks in marble have almost everything in common
except their colour, and so do the streaks of pink and white in a carnation. From this
we can easily infer that colour doesn't have much to do with the intrinsic nature—·the
microscopic ﬁne texture·—of a body, but only on the quasi-mechanical arrangement of
its larger parts. These instances are •diﬀerence-solitary. . . .
23. Class 2 of privileged instances: shifting instances. Those are ones where the
nature under study is •shifting towards being produced when it didn't previously exist,
or •shifting towards non-existence when it existed before. Shifting instances,
whichever kind of shift they involve, are always twofold, or rather it is one instance in
which the movement is continued until it reaches the opposite state.
[At this point some material is removed, and will be reinserted as a paragraph
between *asterisks* below; it is easier to understand there than it would be here.]

Here is an example of a shifting instance. Suppose we are investigating whiteness:
shifting instances in which the shift is towards production or existence ·of whiteness·
are
unbroken glass shifting to powdered glass ordinary water shifting to water shaken
up to make foam.
Plain glass and water are transparent, not white, whereas pounded glass and foaming
water are white, not transparent. So we have to ask what happened to the glass or
water in this shift. Obviously, the form of whiteness is brought in by the pounding of
the glass and the shaking of the water; but we ﬁnd that nothing has occurred except
the breaking up of the glass and water into small parts, and the introduction of air. So
we have this result:
Two bodies, air and water (or: air and glass) which are more or less transparent
come to exhibit whiteness as soon as they are broken up into small bits ·and the
bits are mixed·, this whiteness being brought about by the unequal refraction of
the rays of light.
This is a big step towards discovering the form of whiteness.
*Such instances don't just lead quickly and securely to exclusions, but also narrow
down the search for the aﬃrmation or the form itself ['exclusion' and 'aﬃrmation' are
introduced in 15 here]. For the form of a thing must be something that is introduced
by a shift, or removed and wiped out by a shift in the other direction. Of course every
exclusion supports some aﬃrmation, but the support is more direct when the
exclusion comes from one case rather than from a number of cases. And my
discussion has made it clear that the form that comes to light in a single instance
leads the way to the discovery of it in all the rest. And the simpler the shift, the more
value we should attach to the instance. And another thing: shifting instances are of
great value in the practical part ·of scientiﬁc inquiry·: a shifting instance exhibits •the
form ·under investigation· linked with •the cause of its existing (or the cause of its not
existing); that provides great clarity in one instance and an easy transition to others.
But shifting instances create a certain danger against which I should warn you: they
may lead us to link the form too closely to its eﬃcient cause, and so encourage a false
view of the form, drawn from a view of the eﬃcient cause. The eﬃcient cause is
always understood to be merely the vehicle for or bearer of the form. It is not hard to
avoid this danger in a properly conducted exclusion.*
I should give an example of this danger. A mind that is led astray by eﬃcient causes
of this sort will too easily conclude that •air is always required for the form of
whiteness, or that •whiteness is generated only by transparent bodies—both of which
are entirely false, and refuted by numerous exclusions. What will be found (setting air
and the like aside) is this:
all the particles that aﬀect vision are equal
transparent
unequal and simply textured
white
unequal with complex regular texture

any but black
unequal and complex in an irregular way
black
So now we have before us an instance with a shift to the •production of the nature
under study, namely whiteness. For an instance that shifts to the •destruction of the
same nature of whiteness, consider breaking up foam or melting snow. In each case,
what you then have is water, not broken into little particles and not mixed with air,
and this sheds whiteness and puts on transparency.
It's important to note that shifting instances include not only those in which the nature
under study shifts toward production or toward destruction, but also those in which
the nature shifts towards increasing or decreasing. It's because these also contribute
to revealing the form, as can be clearly seen from the deﬁnition of form that I have
given ·in 17·, and the Table of Degrees [starting here]. Paper that is white when dry
become less white and nearer to being transparent when it is wetted—i.e. when air is
excluded and water introduced. The explanation of what is happening here is
analogous to the explanation of the ﬁrst shifting instances.
24. Class 3 of privileged instances: revealing instances, which I have already
mentioned in the ﬁrst harvest concerning heat, and which I also call 'luminous' and
'freed and predominant'. They are the instances in which the nature under study is
revealed
naked and standing on its own feet, and also
at its height and in full strength,
not muﬄed by any impediments. This is either because •there aren't any
impediments in this instance or because •there are some but the nature we are
studying is present in such strength that it holds them down and pushes them around.
·Here is the background setting for these revealing instances·:
Every body is capable of having many forms or natures linked together; they can
crush, depress, break and bind one another so that the individual forms are
obscured. But we ﬁnd that in some subjects the nature under investigation stands
out from the others, either because there are no obstacles or because its vigorous
strength makes it prominent.
Instances of this kind reveal the form with special clarity.
But we should be careful in our handling of ·what seem to be· revealing instances, not
rushing to conclusions. When something reveals a form very conspicuously and seems
to force it on the notice of our intellect, we should view it with suspicion and should
avail ourselves of a strict and careful exclusion ·of other potentially relevant features,
rather than abruptly brushing them aside in our enthusiasm for the conspicuous
nature that has attracted our attention·.
Suppose, for example, that we are investigating the nature of heat. As I said earlier [in
item 38 here], the motion of expansion is the main element in the form of heat, and a
revealing instance of that is a •thermometer. Although •ﬂame obviously exhibits
expansion, it doesn't show expansion as an ongoing process, because a ﬂame can be
so quickly snuﬀed out. Nor does •boiling water provide a good display of expansion in
its own body ·as water· because it so easily turns into vapour or air. As for red-hot iron

and its like: they are so far from exhibiting expansion as an ongoing process that their
expansion is almost imperceptible; that's because their spirit is being crushed and
broken by the coarse and compact particles, which curb and subdue the expansion.
But a thermometer clearly displays expansion in air, revealing it as conspicuous,
progressive, and enduring rather than transitory.
To take another example: suppose the nature inquired into is weight. A revealing
instance of weight is mercury. It is heavier than anything else except gold, which is
only slightly heavier; and mercury does a better job of indicating the form of weight
than gold does, because gold is solid and compact—features that seem to come from
its density— whereas mercury is liquid and full of spirit despite being much heavier
than the diamond and other bodies that are thought to be the most solid. This reveals
that the form of heaviness or weight depends simply on the quantity of matter and
not on how compact the body is.
25. Class 4 of privileged instances: concealed instances, which I also ·though not
again in this work· call 'instances of the twilight'. They are pretty nearly the exact
opposites of revealing instances. They exhibit the nature under investigation at its
lowest strength, as though it were in its cradle, newly born, making its ﬁrst attempts
but buried under and subdued by a contrary nature. Still, such instances are very
helpful in the discovery of forms; because just as
revealing instances lead easily to •speciﬁc diﬀerences,
so also
concealed instances are the best guides to •genera,
i.e. to the common natures of which the natures under investigation are merely
special cases. ·That is to say, revealing instances help us to move down the
classiﬁcatory table, concealed instances help us to move up·.
Suppose for example that the nature under investigation is •solidity or a thing's
holding its shape, the opposite of which is •ﬂuidity. Concealed instances of this are
ones that exhibit some low level of shape-holding in a ﬂuid—for example a bubble of
water, which has a sort of shaped skin made of water. Similarly with trickling water: if
the water keeps coming, the drops lengthen themselves out into a thin thread so as to
keep the stream unbroken; and if there isn't enough water for that, the water falls in
round drops, that being the shape that best preserves the water from breaking up
·into still smaller portions·. But the instant the thread of water stops and the drops
begin, the water jumps back upwards so as to avoid breaking. And in metals, which
when melted form thick ﬂuids, the molten drops often jump back up and stay there. . .
. The same kind of thing can be seen in the children's game when they take water,
thicken it a little with soap, and blow it through a hollow reed: this combines the water
with air so as to make a cluster of bubbles that is ﬁrm enough to be thrown some
distance without breaking up. But foam and snow provide the best examples of this
phenomenon. They become almost solid enough to be cut with a knife, although they
are made out of two ﬂuids—air and water. All of this pretty clearly indicates •that
'solid' and 'liquid' are ·not useful terms in the present context, because they are·
layman's notions which relate ·not to the scientiﬁc facts about a thing but only to how
it strikes· our senses. It also indicates •that in fact all bodies have a tendency to avoid
being broken up, a tendency that is weak in homogeneous bodies (which is what ﬂuids
are), and stronger in bodies made up of diﬀerent kinds of materials (·the ones the
layman calls 'solid'·). That is because a body is bound together when heterogeneous

matter is introduced to it, whereas the insertion of homogeneous matter dissolves the
body and makes it fall apart.
Here are three more examples. (1) Suppose that the nature we are investigating is
the attraction or coming together of bodies. The best revealing instance of the form of
this is the magnet. There is also the non-attracting nature—the contrary of the
attracting one—and this can even be found in the same substance. Thus iron doesn't
attract iron, lead doesn't attract lead, or wood wood, or water water.
[In what follows, an 'armed' magnet is one equipped with an 'armature' in the sense
of 'a piece of soft iron placed in contact with the poles of the magnet, which preserves
and increases the magnetic power; or any arrangement which produces the same
result' (OED). Another such arrangement is an 'armature' in our sense of the word—
coils of wire conducting electricity— but that wasn't discovered as a means of
magnetism until two centuries later.]
Now a concealed instance ·of attraction· is provided by •a magnet armed with iron, or
rather by •the iron in an armed magnet. Its nature is such that
an armed magnet does not attract iron from a distance more powerfully than an
unarmed magnet does,
whereas
when the iron in an armed magnet touches some other iron, the magnet supports
a far greater weight of iron than a simple unarmed magnet would.
This is because of the similarity of substances, iron on iron—an eﬀect that was latent
in the iron ·all along·, but was completely concealed before the magnet was brought
into play. So it is clear that the form of coming-together is something that is lively and
strong in the magnet, feeble and latent in iron. (2) It has been noticed that small
wooden arrows with no iron points, shot from large guns into the sides of ships or into
other wooden targets, penetrate more deeply than they would if they were tipped with
iron. This is because of the similarity of substances, wood on wood, although this
property had previously been latent in the wood—·only latent, and thus concealed·.
(3) Similarly, whole bodies of air (water) don't obviously attract other bodies of air
(water), but the likelihood of a bubble's bursting is increased when it is touched by
another bubble. This is because of water's ·usually concealed· inclination to join with
water, and air's to join with air. Such concealed instances (which are very useful, as I
have said) show up most conspicuously in small portions of bodies. The reason for
that is that larger masses follow more general forms, as I'll explain in due course.

Novum Organum: Introduction
In light of its value as a rationalist text, its historical inﬂuence on the progress of
science, and its general expression of the philosophy and vision which guides
LessWrong 2.0, the moderation team has seen ﬁt to publish Novum Organum as a
LessWrong sequence. (Image: the engraved title page.)
Quotes in this post are from Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version by
Jonathan Bennett presented at www.earlymoderntexts.com
In 1620, Francis Bacon's Novum Organum was published. Though the work might be
succinctly described as Bacon's views on empiricism and inductivism, it is far more
than a list of experimental steps to be followed. It is an entire epistemology and
philosophy—possibly the epistemology and philosophy which underlay the Scientiﬁc
Revolution.
Bacon was damning of the science of his time and preceding centuries. He saw the
pseudo-empirical syllogistic paradigm as deeply ﬂawed and incapable of making
progress.
If those doctrines ·of the ancient Greeks· hadn't been so utterly like a plant torn
up by its roots, and had remained attached to and nourished by the womb of
nature, the state of aﬀairs that we have seen to obtain for two thousand years—
namely the sciences stayed in the place where they began, hardly changing, not
getting any additions worth mentioning, thriving best in the hands of their ﬁrst
founders and declining from then on—would never have come about. (74) [1]

He also believed that the unaided human mind was incapable of getting far on its
own.
Nearly all the things that go wrong in the sciences have a single cause and root,
namely: while wrongly admiring and praising the powers of the human mind, we
don't look for true helps for it. (9)
Not much can be achieved by the naked hand or by the unaided intellect. Tasks
are carried through by tools and helps, and the intellect needs them as much as
the hand does. (2)
When the intellect of a sober, patient, and grave mind is left to itself (especially in
a mind that isn't held back by accepted doctrines), it ventures a little way along
the right path; but it doesn't get far, because without guidance and help it isn't up
to the task, and is quite unﬁt to overcome the obscurity of things. (21)
Nonetheless, he was optimistic that if the old doctrines were abandoned, idols of the
mind (i.e., biases, fallacies, and confusions) were cleared out, and his precise, careful
empirical method was followed by a community of scholars, then no knowledge was
out of reach and humanity would eventually achieve all of the most splendid
discoveries.
Until now men haven't lingered long with •experience; they have brushed past it
on their way to the ingenious •theorizings on which they have wasted unthinkable
amounts of time. But if we had someone at hand who could answer our questions
of the form 'What are the facts about this matter?', it wouldn't take many years
for us to discover all causes and complete every science. (112)
The human mind is fallible and ﬂawed—"like a distorting mirror,'' Bacon says—yet its
biases can be overcome. Through adherence to properly looking at the world, such
that if "the road from the senses to the intellect [is] well defended with walls along
each side," then a scientiﬁc community can ﬁgure out the world and even reach
Utopia.
This a decidedly LessWrong worldview.
Indeed, by my reading, Bacon possessed in some form a large number of concepts
employed on LessWrong, not limited to: conﬁrmation bias, motivated cognition, the
bottom line, mind-projection fallacy, positive bias, entangled evidence, carving reality
at its joints, fake causality, worshipping ignorance, idea inoculation, the surprisingly
detailedness of reality, inferential distance, incentives, and dissolving confused
language. He even spoke of the appropriate degrees of certainty for each stage of an
inquiry and deliberately used epistemic statuses!
Novum Organum was Bacon's monumental attempt to explain all of the above: how
and why the existing scientiﬁc methods were entirely broken, why nobody had noticed
until then, what the alternative paradigm was, and a vision for a community of
scholars and institutions which could help discover all scientiﬁc truths.
Covering biases and empiricism as it does, Novum Organum is highly instructive as a
rationalist text. Yet why read Bacon when we've got the Sequences, Codex, and the

rest of modern LessWrong? I answer that it's worthwhile because there's a focus and
immediacy to a text whose author wasn't writing abstractly, but direly wanted to
redirect all the scientiﬁc eﬀorts of his time to be more productive.
There's an impressiveness to someone grappling with how to do science at a point
when so much less was known about the world. Compared to us, Bacon's time was
one of extreme mystery. Recall that he was writing before Boyle, Newton, Maxwell, or
Darwin. He did not have access to theories of thermodynamics, electromagnetism,
evolution, or atomic physics. They hadn't even invented the mercury thermometer in
his time. He earnestly tried to ﬁgure out simply "what is heat?" and by use of his
meticulous empiricism correctly inferred it was just something to do with motion—150
years before phlogiston theory was laid to rest and with access to only primitive air-
based thermometers!
We get to look back and point to all that modern science has done over the centuries
to make us feel enthusiastic. Four hundred years ago, Bacon's enthusiasm came
entirely from his ability to look forward.
There is also perhaps a validation of the LessWrong worldview to be found in Bacon.
Bacon was a symbolic ﬁgure of the Scientiﬁc Revolution. Inspirational to the Royal
Society and many others. Historical credit allocation is hard, but it seems more likely
than not that Bacon gets a good deal of credit in bringing about the Scientiﬁc
Revolution. Seemingly, many of the same ideas that we cherish now were read by the
scholars who ﬁrst read Bacon and kicked oﬀ the modern scientiﬁc era. If only people
hadn't stopped reading Bacon in the original after a few generations.
Beyond his instruction in biases and empiricism, Bacon in an inspiration to the
LessWrong 2.0 project [2] for his visions of how infrastructure and community are key
to intellectual progress. Bacon saw intellectual progress as a technological [3] and
collaborative endeavor, exactly as LessWrong 2.0 does.
At the technologies for individual thinking level, Bacon writes:
Not much can be achieved by the naked hand or by the unaided intellect. Tasks
are carried through by tools and helps, and the intellect needs them as much as
the hand does. And just as the hand's tools either give motion or guide it, so ·in a
comparable way· the mind's tools either point the intellect in the direction it
should go or oﬀer warnings. (2)
Bacon is further adamant that the process of science requires people to write their
work down and share it. Perhaps this is obvious now, but Bacon was writing before the
ﬁrst scientiﬁc journal, indeed, he is credited as a major inspiration for the Royal
Society whose philosophical transactions were the ﬁrst scientiﬁc journal.
Even after we have acquired and have ready at hand a store of natural history and
experimental results such as is required for the work of the intellect, or of
philosophy, still that is not enough. The intellect is far from being able to retain all
this material in memory and recall it at will, any more than a man could keep a
diary all in his head. Yet until now there has been more thinking than writing about
discovery procedures—experimentation hasn't yet become literate! But a
discovery isn't worth much if it isn't ·planned and reported· in writing; and when
this becomes the standard practice, better things can be hoped for from
experimental procedures that have at last been made literate. (101)

Yet another point, maybe, obvious to us now: the work of science can be split up
among people.
Unlike the work of sheerly thinking up hypotheses, proper scientiﬁc work can be
done collaboratively; the best way is for men's eﬀorts (especially in collecting
experimental results) to be exerted separately and then brought together. Men will
begin to know their strength only when they go this way—with one taking charge
of one thing and another of another, instead of all doing all the same things.
(113)
Though Bacon's greatest reference to collaborating and institution for knowledge
perhaps comes from his utopian novel, New Atlantis. One character describes the
ﬁctional institution of Solomon's House:
Ye shall understand (my dear friends) that amongst the excellent acts of that king,
one above all hath the pre-eminence. It was the erection and institution of an
Order or Society, which we call Salomon's House; the noblest foundation (as we
think) that ever was upon the earth; and the lanthorn of this kingdom. It is
dedicated to the study of the works and creatures of God. Some think it beareth
the founder's name a little corrupted, as if it should be Solamona's House. But the
records write it as it is spoken. So as I take it to be denominate of the king of the
Hebrews, which is famous with you, and no stranger to us.
The novel goes into great depth about how the institution functions and all the roles
diﬀerent individuals play in the scientiﬁc process. According to Wikipedia, it is this
vision which inspired Samuel Hartlib and Robert Boyle to found the Royal Society.
To conclude this introduction, I'll mention that Novum Organum is actually part two of
six from Bacon's much larger, never-completed work, Instauratio Magna. The title is
usually translated as The Great Instauration yet Bennett (whose translation of Novum
Organum we are posting) translates it as The Great Fresh Start. Seems ﬁtting to
Bacon's intentions.
It is pointless to expect any great advances in science from grafting new things
onto old. If we don't want to go around in circles for ever, making 'progress' that is
so small as be almost negligible, we must make a fresh start with deep
foundations. (31)
Given the Scientiﬁc Revolution got going in earnest around his lifetime, I dare say he
got what we he asked for.
[1] Novum Organum consists two books each containing "aphorisms" which range in
length from three lines to sixteen pages. A bold number on its own refers to an
aphorism from Book 1 by default or Book 2 where the context is very clear. When
unclear, aphorisms are referenced by a leading 1- or 2- to disambiguate, e.g 2-13 is
the 13th aphorism in Book 2.
[2] Usually, we now call ourselves simply "LessWrong" but it feels important to
disambiguate here since I cannot make claims to the vision for original LessWrong as
founded in 2009 by Eliezer. It does seem clear that Eliezer was not inﬂuenced by
Bacon in the same way that Habryka (LessWrong 2.0's team lead and core founder)
has been.

[3] By technological I refer broadly to the creation of knowledge and tools that can be
used for a speciﬁc purpose, including things like methodologies and procedures, not
just physical artifacts. I would call a set of techniques for debiasing one's thinking and
likewise training for how to moderate an online forum as both examples of
technologies.

Novum Organum: Preface
Previously: Ruby's introduction to the Novum Organum sequence
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
Ruby's Reading Guide
Novum Organum is organized as two books each containing numbered
"aphorisms." These vary in length from three lines to sixteen pages. Titles of posts
in this sequence, e.g. Idols of the Mind Pt. 1, are my own and do not appear in the
original.
While the translator, Bennett, encloses his editorial remarks in a single pair of
[brackets], I have enclosed mine in a [[double pair of brackets]].
Bennett's Reading Guide
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has
been added, but can be read as though it were part of the original text. Occasional
•bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not quotations, are meant as aids
to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis . . . .
indicates the omission of a brief passage that seems to present more diﬃculty
than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported between brackets in normal-sized
type.
'Organon' is the conventional title for the collection of logical works by Aristotle, a
body of doctrine that Bacon aimed to replace. His title Novum Organum could
mean 'The New Organon' or more modestly 'A New Organon'; the tone of the
writing in this work points to the deﬁnite article.
Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Preface
by Francis Bacon
Those who have taken it on themselves to lay down the law of nature as something
that has already been discovered and understood, whether they have spoken in
simple conﬁdence or in a spirit of professional posturing, have done great harm to
philosophy and the sciences. As well as succeeding in •producing beliefs in people,
they have been eﬀective in •squashing and stopping inquiry; and the harm they have
done by spoiling and putting an end to other men's eﬀorts outweighs any good their
own eﬀorts have brought. Some people on the other hand have gone the opposite
way, asserting that absolutely nothing can be known—having reached this opinion
through dislike of the ancient sophists, or through uncertainty and ﬂuctuation of mind,
or even through being crammed with some doctrine or other. They have certainly
advanced respectable reasons for their view; but zeal and posturing have carried

them much too far: they haven't •started from true premises or •ended at the right
conclusion. The earlier of the ancient Greeks (whose writings are lost) showed better
judgment in taking a position between
one extreme: presuming to pronounce on everything,
and
the opposite extreme: despairing of coming to understand anything.
My method is hard to practice but easy to explain. I propose to •establish degrees of
certainty, to •retain ·the evidence of· the senses subject to certain constraints, but
mostly to •reject ways of thinking that track along after sensation. In place of that, I
open up a new and certain path for the mind to follow, starting from sense-perception.
The need for this was felt, no doubt, by those who gave such importance to dialectics;
their emphasis on dialectics showed that they were looking for aids to the intellect,
and had no conﬁdence in the innate and spontaneous process of the mind.
[Bacon's dialectica, sometimes translated as 'logic', refers more narrowly to the
formalized and rule-governed use of logic, especially in debates.]
But this remedy did no good, coming as it did after the processes of everyday life had
ﬁlled the mind with hearsay and debased doctrines and infested it with utterly empty
idols. (·I shall explain 'idols' in 39-45·.) The upshot was that the art of dialectics,
coming (I repeat) too late to the rescue and having no power to set matters right, was
only good for ﬁxing errors rather than for revealing truth.
[Throughout this work, 'art' will refer to any human activity that involves techniques
and requires skills.]
We are left with only one way to health—namely to start the work of the mind all over
again. In this, the mind shouldn't be left to its own devices, but right from the outset
should be guided at every step, as though a machine were in control.
Certainly if in mechanical projects men had set to work with their naked hands,
without the help and power of tools, just as in intellectual matters they have set to
work with little but the naked forces of the intellect, even with their best collaborating
eﬀorts they wouldn't have achieved—or even attempted—much. . . . Suppose that
some enormous stone column had to be moved from its place (wanted elsewhere for
some ceremonial purpose), and that men started trying to move it with their naked
hands, wouldn't any sober spectator think them mad? If they then brought in more
people, thinking that that might do it, wouldn't he think them even madder? If they
then weeded out the weaker labourers, and used only the strong and vigorous ones,
wouldn't he think them madder than ever? Finally, if they resolved to get help from
the art of athletics, and required all their workers to come with hands, arms, and
sinews properly oiled and medicated according to good athletic practice, wouldn't the
onlooker think 'My God, they are trying to show method in their madness!'?
Yet that is exactly how men proceed in intellectual matters—with just the same kind of
mad eﬀort and useless combining of forces—when they hope to achieve great things
either through their individual brilliance or through the sheer number of them who will
co-operate in the work, and when they try through dialectics (which we can see as a
kind of athletic art) to strengthen the sinews of the intellect. With all this study and
eﬀort, as anyone with sound judgment can see, they are merely applying the naked
intellect; whereas in any great work to be done by the hand of man the only way to

increase the force exerted by each and to co-ordinate the eﬀorts of all is through
instruments and machinery.
Arising from those prefatory remarks, there are two more things I have to say; I want
them to be known, and not forgotten. ·One concerns ancient philosophers, the other
concerns modern philosophy·.
(1) If I were to declare that I could set out on •the same road as the ancient
philosophers and come back with something better than they did, there would be no
disguising the fact that I was setting up a rivalry between them and me, inviting a
comparison in respect of our levels of excellence or intelligence or competence. There
would nothing new in that, and nothing wrong with it either, for if the ancients got
something wrong, why couldn't I—why couldn't anyone—point it out and criticise them
for it? But that contest, however right or permissible it was, might have been an
unequal one, casting an unfavourable light on my powers. So it is a good thing—good
for avoiding conﬂicts and intellectual turmoil—that I can leave untouched the honour
and reverence due to the ancients, and do what I plan to do while gathering the fruits
of my modesty! There won't be any conﬂict here: my aim is to open up •a new road
for the intellect to follow, a road the ancients didn't know and didn't try. I shan't be
taking a side or pressing a case. My role is merely that of a guide who points out the
road—a lowly enough task, depending more on a kind of luck than on any ability or
excellence.
(2) That was a point about persons; the other thing I want to remind you of concerns
the topic itself. Please bear this in mind: I'm not even slightly working to overthrow
the philosophy [here = 'philosophy and science'] that is ﬂourishing these days, or any
other more correct and complete philosophy that has been or will be propounded. I
don't put obstacles in the way of this accepted philosophy or others like it; ·let them
go on doing what they have long done so well·—let them give philosophers something
to argue about, provide decoration for speech, bring proﬁt to teachers of rhetoric and
civil servants! Let me be frank about it: the philosophy that I shall be advancing isn't
much use for any of those purposes. It isn't ready to hand; you can't just pick it up as
you go; it doesn't ﬁt with preconceived ideas in a way that would enable it to slide
smoothly into the mind; and the vulgar won't ever get hold of it except through its
practical applications and its eﬀects.
[In this work, 'vulgar' means 'common, ordinary, run-of-the-mill' (as in 'vulgar
induction' 17) or, as applied to people, 'having little education and few intellectual
interests'.]
So let there be two sources of doctrine, two disciplines, two groups of philosophers,
and two ways of doing philosophy, with the groups not being hostile or alien to each
other, but bound together by mutual services. In short, let there be one discipline for
cultivating the knowledge we have, and another for discovering new knowledge. This
may be pleasant and beneﬁcial for both. Most men are in too much of a hurry, or too
preoccupied with business aﬀairs, to engage with my way of doing philosophy—or
they don't have the mental powers needed to understand it. If for any of those
reasons you prefer the other way—·prefer cultivation to discovery·—I wish you all
success in your choice, and I hope you'll get what you are after. But if you aren't
content to stick with the knowledge we already have, and want
to penetrate further,
to conquer nature by works, not conquer an adversary by argument,
to look not for nice probable opinions but for sure proven knowledge,

I invite you to join with me, if you see ﬁt to do so. [In this context, 'works' are
experiments.] Countless people have stamped around in nature's outer courts; let us
get across those and try to ﬁnd a way into the inner rooms. For ease of
communication and to make my approach more familiar by giving it a name, I have
chosen to call one of these approaches 'the mind's anticipation ·of nature·', the
other 'the interpretation of nature'.
[Throughout this work, 'anticipation' means something like 'second-guessing, getting
ahead of the data, jumping the gun'. Bacon means it to sound rash and risky; no one
current English word does the job.]
I have one request to make, ·namely that my courtesies towards you, the reader, shall
be matched by your courtesies to me·. I have put much thought and care into
ensuring that the things I say will be not only true but smoothly and comfortably
accepted by •your mind, however clogged •it is by previous opinions. It is only fair—
especially in such a great restoration of learning and knowledge—for me to ask a
favour in return, namely this: If you are led •by the evidence of your senses, or •by
the jostling crowd of 'authorities', or •by arguments in strict logical form (which these
days are respected as though they were the law of the land), to want to pass
judgment on these speculations of mine, don't think you can do this casually, while
you are mainly busy with something else. Examine the matter thoroughly; go a little
distance yourself along the road that I describe and lay out; make yourself familiar
with the subtlety of things that our experience indicates; give your deeply-rooted bad
mental habits a reasonable amount of time to correct themselves; and then, when you
have started to be in control of yourself, use your own judgment—if you want to.
[Bacon doesn't ever in this work address the reader at length. This version sometimes
replaces 'If anybody. . . ' by 'If you. . . ', 'Men should. . . ' by 'You should. . . ' and so
on, to make the thought easier to follow.]

The Inadequacy of Current Science
(Novum Organum Book 1: 1-37)
This is the third post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see the
sequence introduction .
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
Ruby's Reading Guide
Novum Organum is organized as two books each containing numbered
"aphorisms." These vary in length from three lines to sixteen pages. Titles of posts
in this sequence, e.g. Idols of the Mind Pt. 1, are my own and do not appear in the
original.
While the translator, Bennett, encloses his editorial remarks in a single pair of
[brackets], I have enclosed mine in a [[double pair of brackets]].
Bennett's Reading Guide
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has
been added, but can be read as though it were part of the original text. Occasional
•bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not quotations, are meant as aids
to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis . . . .
indicates the omission of a brief passage that seems to present more diﬃculty
than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported between brackets in normal-sized
type.

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 1: 1-37
by Francis Bacon
1. Man, being nature's servant and interpreter, is limited in what he can do and
understand by what he has observed of the course of nature—directly observing it or
inferring things ·from what he has observed·. Beyond that he doesn't know anything
and can't do anything.
2. Not much can be achieved by the naked hand or by the unaided intellect. Tasks are
carried through by tools and helps, and the intellect needs them as much as the hand
does. And just as the hand's tools either •give motion or •guide it, so ·in a comparable
way· the mind's tools either •point the intellect in the direction it should go or • oﬀer
warnings.
3. Human knowledge and human power meet at a point; for where the cause isn't
known the eﬀect can't be produced. The only way to command nature is to obey it;
and something that functions as the •cause in thinking about a process functions as
the •rule in the process itself.
4. All that man can do to bring something about is to put natural bodies together or to
pull them away from one another. The rest is done by nature working within.
5. The mechanic, the mathematician, the physician, the alchemist and the magician
have all rubbed up against nature in their activities; but so far they haven't tried hard
and haven't achieved much.
6. If something has never yet been done, it would be absurd and self-contradictory to
expect to achieve it other than through means that have never yet been tried.
[[Similar: not every change is an improvement, but every improvement is a change.]]
7. If we go by the contents of •books and by •manufactured products, the mind and
the hand seem to have had an enormous number of oﬀspring. But all that variety
consists in very ﬁne-grained special cases of, and derivatives from, a few things that
were already known; not in a large number of fundamental propositions.
8. Moreover, the works that have already been achieved owe more to chance and
experiment than to disciplined sciences; for the sciences we have now are merely
pretty arrangements of things already discovered, not ways of making discoveries or
pointers to new achievements.
9. Nearly all the things that go wrong in the sciences have a single cause and root,
namely: while wrongly admiring and praising the powers of the human mind, we don't
look for true helps for it.
10. Nature is much subtler than are our senses and intellect; so that all those elegant
meditations, theorizings and defensive moves that men indulge in are crazy—except
that no-one pays attention to them.

[Bacon often uses a word meaning 'subtle' in the sense of 'ﬁne-grained, delicately
complex'; no one current English word will serve.]
[[An especially good example of this point, that nature is far more "subtle" than our
senses and mind, is the generally counterintuitive fact that our universe runs on
quantum mechanics. In Can You Prove Two Particles Are Identical?, Eliezer points to
this weird aspects of reality that one is very unlikely to discover without the
empiricism/appropriate tools and methodology which Bacon is advocating for.]]
11. just as the sciences that we now have are useless for devising new inventions, the
logic that we now have is useless for discovering new sciences.
[Bacon here uses inventio in two of its senses, as = 'invent' and as = 'discover'.]
12. The logic now in use serves to •ﬁx and stabilize errors based on the ideas of the
vulgar, rather than to •search for truth. So it does more harm than good.
[[The next few aphorisms dealing with syllogism and axioms are made with reference
to the Aristotelian 'scientiﬁc method.' In that classical approach, a few real-world
examples are used to derive high-level universal rules or laws which are then
operated on with logic to derive further conclusions. See this comment below for more
detail.]
The leap from a few examples to high-level general principles is what Bacon is calling
out when in 19 he speaks of 'swooping up' from particulars to general axioms. This is
in contrast to his gradual, incremental, inductive method that starts with limited
statements of rule and only slowly generalizes as more data is accumulated.]]
13. The syllogism isn't brought to bear on the •basic principles of the sciences; it is
applied to •intermediate axioms, but nothing comes of this because the syllogism is
no match for nature's subtlety. It constrains what you can assent to, but not what can
happen.
[[These remarks bear resemblance to those in The Parable of Hemlock.]]
14. A •syllogism consists of •propositions, which consist of •words, which are stand-
ins [tesserae, literally = 'tickets'] for •notions. So the root of the trouble is this: If the
notions are confused, having been sloppily abstracted from the facts, nothing that is
built on them can be ﬁrm. So our only hope lies in true induction.
15. There is no soundness in ·our· notions, whether in logic or in natural science.
These are not sound notions:
substance, quality, acting, undergoing, being;
And these are even less sound:
heavy, light, dense, rare, moist, dry, generation, corruption, attraction,
repulsion, element, matter, form
and so on; all of those are fantastical and ill-deﬁned.
['Rare' = 'opposite of dense'. Generation is the coming into existence of living things;
corruption is rotting or falling to pieces, and so refers to the going out of existence of

living things. For the next sentence: a 'lowest species' is one that doesn't further
divide into subspecies.]
16. ·Our· notions of the lowest species (man, dog, dove) and of the immediate
perceptions of the senses (hot, cold, black, white) don't seriously mislead us; yet even
they are sometimes confusing because of how matter ﬂows and things interact. As for
all the other notions that men have adopted—they are mere aberrations, not being
caused by things through the right kind of abstraction.
17. The way •axioms are constructed is as wilful and wayward as the abstractions
through which •notions are formed. I say this even about the principles that result
from vulgar induction, but much more about the axioms and less basic propositions
that the syllogism spawns.
18. The discoveries that have been made in the sciences up to now lie close to vulgar
notions, scarcely beneath the surface. If we are to penetrate into nature's inner and
further recesses, we'll need •a safer and surer method for deriving notions as well as
axioms from things, as well as •an altogether better and more certain way of
conducting intellectual operations.
19. There are and can be only two ways of searching into and discovering truth. (1)
One of them starts with the senses and particular events and swoops straight up from
them to the most general axioms; on the basis of these, taken as unshakably true
principles, it proceeds to judgment and to the discovery of intermediate axioms. This
is the way that people follow now. (2) The other derives axioms from the senses and
particular events in a gradual and unbroken ascent, ·going through the intermediate
axioms and· arriving ﬁnally at the most general axioms. This is the true way, but no-
one has tried it.
[[Reminder that 'dialectics' is generally Bacon's term for logic, but he is seemingly
speciﬁcally referring to the logic and processes followed in Aristotle's methods.]]
20. When the intellect is left to itself it takes the same way—namely (1)—that it does
when following the rules of dialectics. For the mind loves to leap up to generalities and
come to rest with them; so it doesn't take long for it to become sick of experiment.
But this evil, ·though it is present both in natural science and in dialectics·, is worse in
dialectics because of the ordered solemnity of its disputations.
21. When the intellect of a sober, patient, and grave mind is left to itself (especially in
a mind that isn't held back by accepted doctrines), it ventures a little way along (2)
the right path; but it doesn't get far, because without guidance and help it isn't up to
the task, and is quite unﬁt to overcome the obscurity of things.
22. Both ways set out from the senses and particular events, and come to rest in the
most general propositions; yet they are enormously diﬀerent. For one of them (1)
merely glances in passing at experiments and particular events, whereas the other
(2) stays among them and examines them with proper respect. One (1) proceeds
immediately to laying down certain abstract and useless generalities, whereas the
other (2) rises by step by step to what is truly better known by nature.
[In calling something 'known to nature' Bacon means that it is a general law of nature;
'better known by nature' could mean 'a more general law of nature' or 'a generality
that is more completely lawlike'.]

23. There is a great diﬀerence between •the idols of the human mind and •the ideas
of God's mind—that is, between •certain empty beliefs and •the true seals [= 'signs
of authenticity'] and marks that we have found in created things.
24. There's no way that axioms •established by argumentation could help us in the
discovery of new things, because the subtlety of nature is many times greater than
the subtlety of argument. But axioms •abstracted from particulars in the proper way
often herald the discovery of new particulars and point them out, thereby returning
the sciences to their active status.
25. The axioms that are now in use are mostly made so that they just cover the items
from which they arise, namely thin and common-or-garden experiences and a few
particulars of the commonest sorts, so it is no wonder if they don't lead to new
particulars. ·And it's not only the axioms, but also the way they are handled, that is
defective·. If some unexpected counter-example happens to turn up, the axiom is
rescued and preserved by some frivolous distinction, rather than (the truer course)
being amended.
[[Once upon a time, the philosophers of Plato's Academy claimed that the best
deﬁnition of human was a "featherless biped".  Diogenes of Sinope, also called
Diogenes the Cynic, is said to have promptly exhibited a plucked chicken and
declared "Here is Plato's man."  The Platonists promptly changed their deﬁnition
to "a featherless biped with broad nails". - Similarity Clusters]]
26. To help me get my ideas across, I have generally used diﬀerent labels for human
reason's two ways of approaching nature: the customary way I describe as
anticipating nature (because it is rash and premature) [Note from the preface:
throughout this work, 'anticipation' means something like 'second-guessing, getting
ahead of the data, jumping the gun'. Bacon means it to sound rash and risky; no one
current English word does the job.] and the way that draws conclusions from facts in
the right way I describe as interpreting nature.
27. Anticipations are a ﬁrm enough basis for consent, for even if men all went mad in
the same way they might agree one with another well enough.
[[consent = agreement]]
28. Indeed, anticipations have much more power to win assent than interpretations
do. They are inferred from a few instances, mostly of familiar kinds, so that they
immediately brush past the intellect and ﬁll the imagination; whereas interpretations
are gathered from very various and widely dispersed facts, so that they can't
suddenly strike the intellect, and must seem weird and hard to swallow—rather like
the mysteries of faith.
[[Bacon appears to be saying that the easy, quick, rash science is easy convince
people of since it has low inferential distance owing to it being derived from a few
familiar examples; in contrast, his diﬃcult and true science built on many
observations and facts has high inferential distance, causing it to seem strange and
weird.]]
29. Anticipations and dialectics have their place in sciences based on opinions and
dogmas, because in those sciences the aim is to be master of •what people believe
but not of •the facts.

30. Even if all the brains of all the ages come together, collaborate and share their
results, no great progress will ever be made in science by means of anticipations. That
is because errors that are rooted in the ﬁrst moves that the mind makes can't be
cured later on by remedial action, however brilliant.
31. It is pointless to expect any great advances in science from grafting new things
onto old. If we don't want to go around in circles for ever, making 'progress' that is so
small as be almost negligible, we must make a fresh start with deep foundations.
['Fresh start' translates instauratio, from the verb instauro = 'make a fresh start (on a
ceremony that has been wrongly performed)'. Bacon planned a six-part work on
science and its philosophy and methods, which he called his Instauratio magna—his
Great Fresh Start. There are other informal mentions of fresh starts in 38 and 129,
and the Great Fresh Start is referred to in 92 and each of 115-117. Bacon died six
years after publishing the present work. It is Part 2 of the Great Fresh Start, and the
only Part he completed.]
32. This is not to attack the honour of the ancient authors or indeed of anyone else,
because I am comparing not •intelligences or •competences but •ways ·of proceeding
in the sciences·; and the role I have taken on is that of a guide, not a judge.
33. This must be said outright: anticipations (the kind of reasoning that is now in use)
can't pass judgment on my method or on discoveries arising from it; for I can't be
called on to submit to the sentence of a tribunal which is itself on trial!
34. It won't be easy for me to deliver and explain my message, for things that are in
themselves new will be understood on analogy with things that are old.
35. Borgia said that when the French marched into Italy they came with chalk in their
hands to •mark out their lodgings, not with weapons to •force their way in. Similarly, I
want my doctrine to enter quietly into the minds that are ﬁt to receive it and have
room for it. ·Forcing my way in with weapons, so to speak, won't work· because
refutations—·and more generally arguments pro and con·—can't be employed when
what's at stake is a diﬀerence of view about ﬁrst principles, notions, and even forms of
demonstration.
36. There remains for me only one way of getting my message across. It is a simple
way, namely this: I must lead you to the particular events themselves, and to the
order in which they occur; and you for your part must force yourself for a while to lay
aside your •notions and start to familiarize yourself with •facts.
37. Those who deny that anything can be known for sure •start oﬀ their thinking in
something like my way, but where they •end up is utterly diﬀerent from and opposed
to where I end up. They say that nothing can be known, period. I say that not much
can be known about nature by the method that is now in use. And then they go on to
destroy the authority of the senses and the intellect, whereas I devise and supply
helps for them.
The next post in the sequence, Book 1: 38-52 (Idols of the Mind Pt. 1), will be posted
Tuesday, September 24 at latest by 4:00pm PDT.

Idols of the Mind Pt. 1 (Novum
Organum Book 1: 38-52)
This is the fourth post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see
the sequence introduction.
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
Ruby's Reading Guide
Novum Organum is organized as two books each containing numbered
"aphorisms." These vary in length from three lines to sixteen pages. Titles of posts
in this sequence, e.g. Idols of the Mind Pt. 1, are my own and do not appear in the
original.
While the translator, Bennett, encloses his editorial remarks in a single pair of
[brackets], I have enclosed mine in a [[double pair of brackets]].
Bennett's Reading Guide
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has
been added, but can be read as though it were part of the original text. Occasional
•bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not quotations, are meant as aids
to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis . . . .
indicates the omission of a brief passage that seems to present more diﬃculty
than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported between brackets in normal-sized
type.

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 1: 38-
52
by Francis Bacon
38. The idols and false notions that now possess the human intellect and have taken
deep root in it don't just •occupy men's minds so that truth can hardly get in, but also
when a truth is allowed in they will •push back against it, stopping it from contributing
to a fresh start in the sciences. This can be avoided only if men are forewarned of the
danger and do what they can to fortify themselves against the assaults of these idols
and false notions.
39. There are four classes of idols that beset men's minds, and to help me in my
exposition I have given them names. I call the ﬁrst class idols of the tribe, the
second idols of the cave, the third idols of the market place, and the fourth idols
of the theatre.
40. The proper way to keep idols at bay and to drive them oﬀ is, no doubt, to form
ideas and axioms by true induction. But it is very useful just to point the idols out; for
•the truth about the idols serves •the interpretation of nature in the way that •the
truth about argumentative fallacies serves •ordinary logical argumentation.
41. The idols of the tribe have their foundation in human nature itself—in the tribe
known as 'mankind'. It is not true that the human senses are the measure of things;
for all perceptions—of the senses as well as of the mind—reﬂect the perceiver rather
than the world. The human intellect is like a distorting mirror, which receives light-rays
irregularly and so mixes its own nature with the nature of things, which it distorts.
[[This is something of a reference to the Mind Projection Fallacy.]]
42. The idols of the cave are the idols of the individual man. In addition to the errors
that are common to human nature in general, everyone has his own personal cave or
den that breaks up and corrupts the light of nature. This may come from factors such
as these:
his own individual nature,
how he has been brought up and how he interacts with others,
his reading of books and the inﬂuence of writers he esteems and admires,
diﬀerences in how his environment aﬀects him because of diﬀerences in his
state of mind—whether it is busy thinking about something else and prejudiced
against this intake or calm and open-minded.
So that the human spirit is distributed among individuals in ways that make it variable
and completely disorderly—almost a matter of luck. Heraclitus was right: men look for
sciences in ·their own individual· lesser worlds, and not in the greater world that they
have in common.
[[Related: Epistemic Luck. However, I believe Bacon's eventual thesis is that even
though luck may determine your starting point, proper use of tools, i.e. empiricism,

can lead to correct conclusions even if you started out unlucky.]]
43. There are also idols formed by men's agreements and associations with each
other (·I have in mind especially the agreements that ﬁx the meanings of words·). I
call these idols of the market place, because that is where men come together and
do business. ·Such transactions create idols· because •men associate by talking to
one another, and •the uses of words reﬂect common folks' ways of thinking. It's
amazing how much the intellect is hindered by wrong or poor choices of words. The
deﬁnitions or explanations that learned men sometimes use to protect themselves
·against such troubles· don't at all set the matter right: words plainly force and
overrule the intellect, throw everything into confusion, and lead men astray into
countless empty disputes and idle fancies.
[[Bacon grokked that misuses of words were a great cause of confusion. He probably
would have like the A Human's Guide to Words Sequence. See Where to Draw the
Boundary? and 37 Ways That Words Can Be Wrong.]]
44. Lastly, there are idols that have come into men's minds from various philosophical
dogmas and from topsy-turvy laws of demonstration. I call these idols of the
theatre, because I regard every one of the accepted systems as the staging and
acting out of a fable, making a ﬁctitious staged world of its own. I don't say this only
about the systems that are currently fashionable, or only about the ancient sects and
philosophies; many other fables of the same kind may still be written and produced,
seeing that errors can be widely diﬀerent yet have very similar causes. And I'm saying
this not only about whole systems but also about a good many principles and axioms
in ·individual· sciences—ones that have gathered strength through tradition, credulity,
and negligence. But these various kinds of idols will have to be discussed more clearly
and at greater length if the human intellect is to be adequately warned against them.
·I'll start with the idols of the tribe, which will be my topic until the end of 52·.
45. The human intellect is inherently apt to •suppose the existence of more order and
regularity in the world than it •ﬁnds there. Many things in nature are unique and not
like anything else; but the intellect devises for them non-existent parallells and
correspondences and relatives. That is how it comes about •that all the heavenly
bodies are thought to move in perfect circles. . . ., •that ﬁre. . . .has been brought in
as one of the elements, to complete the square with the other three elements—·earth,
air, water·—which the senses detect, and •that the 'elements' (as they are called) are
arbitrarily said to diﬀer in density by a factor of ten to one. And so on for other
dreams. And these fancies aﬀect not only ·complex· propositions but also simple
notions.
[[People see patterns everywhere, many that aren't there.]]
46. Once a human intellect has adopted an opinion (either as something it likes or as
something generally accepted), it draws everything else in to conﬁrm and support it.
[[Conﬁrmation bias.]] Even if there are more and stronger instances against it ·than
there are in its favour·, the intellect either •overlooks these or •treats them as
negligible or •does some line-drawing that lets it shift them out of the way and reject
them. This involves a great and pernicious prejudgment by means of which the
intellect's former conclusions remain inviolate.
A man was shown a picture, hanging in a temple, of people who had made their
vows and escaped shipwreck, and was asked 'Now do you admit the power of the

gods?' He answered with a question: 'Where are the pictures of those who made
their vows and then drowned?'
[[A correct identiﬁcation of selection bias/survivorship bias/anthropic bias.]]
It was a good answer! That's how it is with all superstition— involving astrology,
dreams, omens, divine judgments, and the like, Men get so much pleasure out of such
vanities that they notice the •conﬁrming events and inattentively pass by the more
numerous •disconﬁrming ones. This mischief insinuates itself more subtly into
philosophy and the sciences: there, when a proposition has found favour it colours
other propositions and brings them into line with itself, even when they ·in their
undisguised form· are sounder and better than it is. Also, apart from the pleasure and
vanity that I have spoken of, the human intellect is perpetually subject to the special
error of being moved and excited more by aﬃrmatives than by negatives; whereas it
ought to have the same attitude towards each. Indeed, when it is a matter of
establishing a true axiom, it's the negative instance that carries more force.
[[The idea of looking for disconﬁrming negative instances is expounded in Positive
Bias: Look Into the Dark.]]
47. The greatest eﬀect on •the human intellect is had by things that strike and enter
the mind simultaneously and unexpectedly; it is these that customarily ﬁll—inﬂate!—
the imagination; and then •it feigns and supposes that everything else is somehow,
though •it can't see how, similar to those few things that have taken it by storm.
['Feign' translates the Latin ﬁngo, which is the source for the English word 'ﬁction'.]
But the intellect is altogether slow and unﬁt for the journey to distant and
heterogeneous instances which put axioms to the test—like testing something by ﬁre
—unless it is forced to do so by severe laws and overruling authority.
48. The human intellect is never satisﬁed; it can't stop or rest, and keeps searching
further; but all to no purpose. That's why we can't conceive of any end or limit to the
world—why we always virtually have to have the thought of something beyond ·any
candidate for the role of world's end·. And we can't conceive, either, of how eternity
has ﬂowed down to the present day. ·A plausible story about this says that time is
inﬁnite in both directions, and the present is just a point along this inﬁnite line. But·
the commonly accepted idea of inﬁnity in time past and in time to come can't be
sustained, for it implies that •one inﬁnity is greater than another, and that •one
inﬁnity is getting used up and tending to become ﬁnite. The inﬁnite divisibility of lines
is a source of a similar network of diﬃculties arising from our thought's inability ·to
reach a resting-place·. But this inability interferes even worse in the discovery of
causes, ·and here is how·.
The most general principles in nature have to be brute facts, just as they are
discovered, and can't be derived from any ·still more general or basic· cause. Yet the
restless human intellect still looks for something
(Latin: notiora = 'better known', probably short for: natura notiora = 'better known
to nature', actually meaning: 'more general and/or basic' [see note in 22])—
·something to explain why they are true·.
Then in that ·doomed· struggle for something further oﬀ, it ·ﬁnds itself defeated, and
instead· falls back on something that is nearer at hand, namely on ﬁnal causes—·i.e.
on the notion of what a principle is for, what purpose explains its being true·. Science
has been enormously messed up by this appeal to ﬁnal causes, which obviously come

from the nature of man rather than from the nature of the world—·that is, which
project the scientist's own purposes onto the world rather than ﬁnding purposes in it·.
[[Similarly another case of Mind Projection Fallacy.]]
To look for causes of the most general principles is to do science in an ignorant and
frivolous way—just as much as not looking for causes of subordinate and less general
truths.
49. The human intellect doesn't burn with a dry [here = 'uncontaminated'] light,
because what the person wants and feels gets pumped into it; and that is what gives
rise to the 'please-yourself sciences'. For a man is more likely to believe something if
he would like it to be true. Therefore he rejects:
diﬃcult things because he hasn't the patience to research them,
sober and prudent things because they narrow hope,
the deeper things of nature, from superstition,
the light that experiments can cast, from arrogance and pride (not wanting
people to think his mind was occupied with trivial things),
surprising truths, out of deference to the opinion of the vulgar.
In short, there are countless ways in which, sometimes imperceptibly, a person's
•likings colour and infect his •intellect.
[[This aphorism calls out the general behavior of motivated cognition.]]
50. But what contributes most to the blockages and aberrations of the human
intellect is the fact that the ·human· senses are dull, incompetent and deceptive. The
trouble is this: things that strike the senses outweigh other things— more important
ones—that don't immediately strike them. That is why people stop thinking at the
point where their eyesight gives out, paying little or no attention to •things that can't
be seen—for example, all the •workings of the spirits enclosed in tangible bodies. Nor
do they pay attention to all the subtler changes of microstructure in the parts of
coarser substances (which are vulgarly called 'alterations' though they are really
extremely small-scale •movements). And yet unless these two things—·the workings
of spirits, and subtle changes of form in bodies·—can be searched out and brought
into the light, nothing great can be achieved in nature in the way of practical
applications. A third example: the essential nature of our common air, and of all the
many bodies that are less dense than air, is almost unknown. For the senses by
themselves are weak and unreliable; and instruments for extending or sharpening
them don't help much. All the truer kind of interpretation of nature comes about
through instances and well-designed experiments: the senses pass judgment on the
experiment, and the experiment passes judgment on nature, on the facts.
[Bacon's many uses of the word schematismus show that for him a body's
schematismus is its ﬁne-grained structure. This version will always use
'microstructure', but be aware that Bacon doesn't use a word with the preﬁx 'micro'.
•Also, here and throughout, 'spirits' are extremely ﬁnely divided gases or ﬂuids, not
mental items of any kind.]
51. The human intellect is inherently prone to make abstractions, and it feigns an
unchanging essence for things that are in ﬂux. But better than •abstracting from
nature is •dissecting it; which is what Democritus and his followers did, getting deeper
into nature than anyone since. What we should be attending to is matter, its
microstructures and changes of microstructure, and actus purus, and the laws of

action or motion. ·The alternative to studying matter is to study forms, but· forms are
fabrications of the human mind, unless you want to call the laws of action 'forms'.
[Bacon doesn't explain actus purus. In each of its other three occurrences he connects
it with laws, and his meaning seems to be something like: 'the laws governing the
pure actions of individual things, i.e. the things they do because of their own natures
independently of interference from anything else'. If x does A partly because of
inﬂuence from something else y, then x is not purely •active in respect of A because
y's inﬂuence gives A a certain degree of •passivity. From here on, actus purus will be
translated by 'pure action'.]
52. Those, then, are the idols of the tribe, as I call them— the idols that ·arise from
human nature as such. More speciﬁcally, they· arise from the human spirit's
•regularity of operation, or its •prejudices, or its •narrowness, or its •restlessness, or
•input from the feelings, or from the •incompetence of the senses, or from •the way
the senses are aﬀected.
The next post in the sequence, Book 1: 53-68 (Idols of the Mind Pt. 2), will be posted
Thursday, September 26 at latest by 4:00pm PDT.

Idols of the Mind Pt. 2 (Novum
Organum Book 1: 53-68)
This is the ﬁfth post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see the
sequence introduction.
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
Ruby's Reading Guide
Novum Organum is organized as two books each containing numbered
"aphorisms." These vary in length from three lines to sixteen pages. Titles of posts
in this sequence, e.g. Idols of the Mind Pt. 1, are my own and do not appear in the
original.
While the translator, Bennett, encloses his editorial remarks in a single pair of
[brackets], I have enclosed mine in a [[double pair of brackets]].
Bennett's Reading Guide
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has
been added, but can be read as though it were part of the original text. Occasional
•bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not quotations, are meant as aids
to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis . . . .
indicates the omission of a brief passage that seems to present more diﬃculty
than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported between brackets in normal-sized
type.

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 1: 53-
68
by Francis Bacon
53. The idols of the cave—·my topic until the end of 58·— arise from the particular
mental and physical make-up of the individual person, and also from upbringing,
habits, and chance events. There are very many of these, of many diﬀerent kinds; but
I shall discuss only the ones we most need to be warned against—the ones that do
most to disturb the clearness of the intellect.
54. A man will become attached to one particular science and ﬁeld of investigation
either because •he thinks he was its author and inventor or because •he has worked
hard on it and become habituated to it. But when someone of this kind turns to
general topics in philosophy ·and science· he wrecks them by bringing in distortions
from his former fancies. This is especially visible in Aristotle, who made his natural
science a mere bond-servant to his logic, rendering it contentious and nearly useless.
The chemists have taken a few experiments with a furnace and made a fantastic
science out of it, one that applies to hardly anything. . . .
[In this work 'chemists' are alchemists. Nothing that we would recognize as chemistry
existed.]
[[We might see Bacon here as claiming that "seeing everything as a nail" can be very
harmful.]]
55. When it comes to philosophy and the sciences, minds diﬀer from one another in
one principal and fairly radical way: some minds have more liking for and skill in
•noting diﬀerences amongst things, others are adapted rather to •noting things'
resemblances. The •steady and acute mind can concentrate its thought, ﬁxing on and
sticking to the subtlest distinctions; the •lofty and discursive mind recognizes and
puts together the thinnest and most general resemblances. But each kind easily goes
too far: one by •grasping for ·unimportant· diﬀerences between things, the other by
•snatching at shadows.
56. Some minds are given to an extreme admiration of antiquity, others to an
extreme love and appetite for novelty. Not many have the temperament to steer a
middle course, not pulling down sound work by the ancients and not despising good
contributions by the moderns. The sciences and philosophy have suﬀered greatly from
this, because these attitudes to antiquity and modernity are not judgments but mere
enthusiasms. Truth is to be sought not in •what people like or enjoy in this or that age,
but in •the light of nature and experience. The •former is variable, the •latter is
eternal. So we should reject these enthusiasms, and take care that our intellect isn't
dragged into them.
57. When you think ·hard and long and uninterruptedly· about nature and about
bodies in their simplicity—·i.e. think of topics like matter as such·—your intellect will
be broken up and will fall to pieces. When on the other hand you think ·in the same
way· about nature and bodies in all their complexity of structure, your intellect will be

stunned and scattered. The diﬀerence between the two is best seen by comparing the
school of Leucippus and Democritus with other philosophies. For the members of that
school were so busy with the ·general theory of· particles that they hardly attended to
the structure, while the others were so lost in admiration of the structure that they
didn't get through to the simplicity of nature. What we should do, therefore, is
alternate between these two kinds of thinking, so that the intellect can become both
penetrating and comprehensive, avoiding the disadvantages that I have mentioned,
and the idols they lead to.
58. Let that kind of procedure be our prudent way of keeping oﬀ and dislodging the
idols of the cave, which mostly come from
intellectual· favouritism (54),
an excessive tendency to compare or to distinguish (55),
partiality for particular historical periods (56), or
the largeness or smallness of the objects contemplated (57).
Let every student of nature take this as a general rule for helping him to keep his
intellect balanced and clear: when your mind seizes on and lingers on something with
special satisfaction, treat it with suspicion!
59. The idols of the market place are the most troublesome of all—idols that have
crept into the intellect out of the contract concerning words and names [Latin
verborum et nominum, which could mean 'verbs and nouns'; on the contract, see 43].
Men think that their reason governs words; but it is also true that words have a power
of their own that reacts back onto the intellect; and this has rendered philosophy and
the sciences sophistical and idle. Because words are usually adapted to the abilities of
the vulgar, they follow the lines of division that are most obvious to the vulgar
intellect. When a language-drawn line is one that a sharper thinker or more careful
observer would want to relocate so that it suited the true divisions of nature, words
stand in the way of the change. That's why it happens that when learned men engage
in high and formal discussions they often end up arguing about words and names,
using deﬁnitions to sort them out—thus •ending where, according to mathematical
wisdom and mathematical practice, it would have been better to •start! But when it
comes to dealing with natural and material things, deﬁnitions can't cure this trouble,
because the deﬁnitions themselves consist of words, and those words beget others.
So one has to have recourse to individual instances. . . .
[[Bacon grokked that misuses of words were a great cause of confusion. He probably
would have like the A Human's Guide to Words Sequence. See Where to Draw the
Boundary? and 37 Ways That Words Can Be Wrong.]]
60. The idols that words impose on the intellect are of two kinds. (1) There are names
of things that don't exist. Just as there are things with no names (because they
haven't been observed), so also there are names with no things to which they refer—
these being upshots of fantastic ·theoretical· suppositions. Examples of names that
owe their origin to false and idle theories are 'fortune', 'prime mover', 'planetary
orbits', and 'element of ﬁre'. This class of idols is fairly easily expelled, because you
can wipe them out by steadily rejecting and dismissing as obsolete all the theories
·that beget them·.
[[See Empty Labels.]]
(2) Then there are names which, though they refer to things that do exist, are
confused and ill-deﬁned, having been rashly and incompetently derived from realities.

Troubles of this kind, coming from defective and clumsy abstraction, are intricate and
deeply rooted. Take the word 'wet', for example. If we look to see how far the various
things that are called 'wet' resemble one other, we'll ﬁnd that 'wet' is nothing but
than a mark loosely and confusedly used to label a variety of states of aﬀairs that
can't be uniﬁed through any constant meaning. For something may be called 'wet'
because it
easily spreads itself around any other body,
has no boundaries and can't be made to stand still,
readily yields in every direction.
easily divides and scatters itself,
easily unites and collects itself,
readily ﬂows and is put in motion,
readily clings to another body and soaks it,
is easily reduced to a liquid, or (if it is solid) easily melts.
Accordingly, when you come to apply the word, if you take it in one sense, ﬂame is
wet; if in another, air is not wet; if in another, ﬁne dust is wet; if in another, glass is
wet. So that it is easy to see that the notion has been taken by abstraction only from
water and common and ordinary liquids, without proper precautions.
Words may diﬀer in how distorted and wrong they are. One of the •least faulty kinds is
that of names of substances, especially names that
are names of lowest species, ·i.e. species that don't divide into sub-species·, and
have been well drawn ·from the substances that they are names of·.
·The drawing of substance-names and -notions from the substances themselves can
be done well or badly. For example·, our notions of chalk and of mud are good, our
notion of earth bad. •More faulty are names of events: 'generate', 'corrupt', 'alter'.
•The most faulty are names of qualities: 'heavy', 'light', 'rare', 'dense', and the like. (I
exclude from this condemnation names of qualities that are immediate objects of the
senses.) Yet in each of these categories, inevitably some notions are a little better
than others because more examples of them come within range of the human senses.
61. The idols of the theatre ·which will be my topic until the end of 68· are not innate,
and they don't steal surreptitiously into the intellect. Coming from the fanciful stories
told by philosophical theories and from upside-down perverted rules of demonstration,
they are openly proclaimed and openly accepted. Things I have already said imply
that there can be no question of refuting these idols: where there is no agreement on
premises or on rules of demonstration, there is no place for argument.
·AN ASIDE ON THE HONOUR OF THE ANCIENTS·
This at least has the advantage that it leaves the honour of the ancients untouched
·because I shall not be arguing against them. I shall be opposing them, but· there will
be no disparagement of them in this, because the question at issue between them
and me concerns only the way. As the saying goes: a lame man on the right road
outstrips the runner who takes a wrong one. Indeed, it is obvious that a man on the
wrong road goes further astray the faster he runs. ·You might think that in claiming to
be able to do better in the sciences than they did, I must in some way be setting
myself up as brighter than they are; but it is not so·. The course I propose for
discovery in the sciences leaves little to the acuteness and strength of intelligence,
but puts all intelligences nearly on a level. My plan is exactly like the drawing of a
straight line or a perfect circle: to do it free-hand you need a hand that is steady and

practised, but if you use a ruler or a compass you will need little if anything else; and
my method is just like that.
·END OF ASIDE·
But though particular counter-arguments would be useless, I should say something
about •the classiﬁcation of the sects whose theories produce these idols, about •the
external signs that there is something wrong with them, and lastly •about the causes
of this unhappy situation, this lasting and general agreement in error. My hope is that
this will make the truth more accessible, and make the human intellect more willing to
be cleansed and to dismiss its idols.
62. There are many idols of the theatre, or idols of theories, and there can be and
perhaps will be many more. For a long time now two factors have militated against the
formation of new theories ·in philosophy and science·.
Men's minds have been busied with religion and theology.
Civil governments, especially monarchies, have been hostile to anything new,
even in theoretical matters; so that men have done that sort of work at their
own peril and at great ﬁnancial cost to themselves—not only unrewarded but
exposed to contempt and envy.
If it weren't for those two factors, there would no doubt have arisen many other
philosophical sects like those that once ﬂourished in such variety among the Greeks.
Just as many hypotheses can be constructed regarding the phenomena of the
heavens, so also—and even more!—a variety of dogmas about the phenomena of
philosophy may be set up and dug in. And something we already know about plays
that poets put on the stage is also true of stories presented on the philosophical stage
—namely that ﬁctions invented for the stage are more compact and elegant and
generally liked than true stories out of history!
What has gone wrong in philosophy is that it has attended in great detail to a few
things, or skimpily to a great many things; either way, it is based on too narrow a
foundation of experiment and natural history, and decides on the authority of too few
cases. (1)Philosophers of the reasoning school snatch up from experience a variety of
common kinds of event, without making sure they are getting them right and without
carefully examining and weighing them; and then they let meditation and brain-work
do all the rest. (2) Another class of philosophers have carefully and accurately studied
a few experiments, and have then boldly drawn whole philosophies from them,
making all other facts ﬁt in by wildly contorting them. (3) Yet a third class consists of
those who are led by their faith and veneration to mix their philosophy with theology
and stuﬀ handed down across the centuries. Some of these have been so foolish and
empty-headed as to have wandered oﬀ looking for knowledge among spirits and
ghosts. So there are the triplets born of error and false philosophy: philosophies that
are (1) sophistical, (2) empirical, and (3) superstitious.
[To explain Bacon's second accusation against Aristotle in 63: A word 'of the second
intention' is a word that applies to items of thought or of language (whereas things
that are out there in the world independently of us are referred to by words 'of the
ﬁrst intention'). Now Aristotle in his prime held that the soul is not a substance but
rather a form: rather than being an independently existing thing that is somehow
combined with the rest of what makes up the man, the soul is a set of facts about how
the man acts, moves, responds, and so on. Bacon has little respect for the term 'form':
in 15 he includes it among terms that are 'fantastical and ill-deﬁned', and in 51 he

says that 'forms are fabrications of the human mind'. This disrespect seems to
underlie the second accusation; the class of forms is not a class of independently
existing things but rather a class of muddy and unfounded ways of thinking and
talking, so that 'form' is a word of the second intention.]
63. The most conspicuous example of (1) the ﬁrst class was Aristotle, whose
argumentative methods spoiled natural philosophy. He
made the world out of categories;
put the human soul, the noblest of substances, into a class based on words of
the second intention;
handled the issues about density and rarity (which have to do with how much
space a body takes up) in terms of the feeble distinction between what does
happen and what could happen;
said that each individual body has one proper motion, and that if it moves in any
other way this must be the result of an external cause,
and imposed countless other arbitrary restrictions on the nature of things. He was
always less concerned about the inner truth of things than he was about providing
answers to questions—saying something deﬁnite. This shows up best when his
philosophy is compared with other systems that were famous among the Greeks. For
the homogeneous substances of Anaxagoras,
the atoms of Leucippus and Democritus,
the heaven and earth of Parmenides,
the strife and friendship of Empedocles, and
Heraclitus's doctrine of bodies' being reduced to the perfectly homogeneous
condition of ﬁre and then remolded into solids,
all have a touch of natural philosophy about them—a tang of the nature of things and
experience and bodies. Whereas in Aristotle's physics you hear hardly anything but
the sounds of logical argument—involving logical ideas that he reworked, in a realist
rather than a nominalist manner, under the imposing name of 'metaphysics'. Don't be
swayed by his frequent mentions of experiments in his On Animals, his Problems, and
others of his treatises. For he didn't consult experience, as he should have done, on
the way to his decisions and ﬁrst principles; rather, he ﬁrst decided what his position
would be, and thenbrought in experience, twisting it to ﬁt his views and making it
captive. So on this count Aristotle is even more to blame than his modern followers,
the scholastics, who have abandoned experience altogether.
64. The (2) empirical school of philosophy gives birth to dogmas that are more
deformed and monstrous than those of the sophistical or reasoning school. The latter
has as its basis the •light of vulgar notions; it's a faint and superﬁcial light, but it is in
a way •universal, and applies to many things. In contrast with that, the empirical
school has its foundation in the •narrowness and •darkness of a few experiments.
Those who busy themselves with these experiments, and have infected their
imagination with them, ﬁnd such a philosophy to be probable and all but certain;
everyone else ﬁnds them ﬂimsy and incredible. A notable example of this ·foolishness·
is provided by the alchemists and their dogmas; these days there isn't much of it
anywhere else, except perhaps in the philosophy of Gilbert. Still, I should oﬀer a
warning relating to philosophies of this kind. If my advice ever rouses men to take
experiments seriously and to bid farewell to sophistical doctrines, then I'm afraid that
they may—I foresee that they will—be in too much of a hurry, will leap or ﬂy ·from
experiments straight· to generalizations and principles of things, risking falling into

just the kind of philosophy I have been talking about. We ought to prepare ourselves
against this evil now, ·well in advance·.
65. The corruption of philosophy by (3) superstition and input from theology is far
more widespread, and does the greatest harm, whether to entire systems or to parts
of them. ·Systems thus aﬄicted are just nonsense judged by ordinary vulgar
standards, but that doesn't protect men from accepting them, because· the human
intellect is open to inﬂuence from the imagination as much as from vulgar notions,
·and in these philosophies it is the imagination that wields the power·. Whereas the
contentious and sophistical kind of philosophy combatively traps the intellect, this
·superstitious· kind, being imaginative and high-ﬂown and half-poetic, coaxes it along.
For men—especially intelligent and high-minded ones—have intellectual ambitions as
well as ambition of the will.
A striking example of this sort of thing among the Greeks is provided by Pythagoras,
though ·his form of it wasn't so dangerous, because· the superstition that he brought
into it was coarser and more cumbrous ·than many·. Another example is provided by
Plato and his school, whose superstition is subtler and more dangerous. Superstition
turns up also in parts of other philosophies, when they
introduce abstract forms—·i.e. forms that aren't the forms of anything·,
and when they do things like
speaking of 'ﬁrst causes' and 'ﬁnal causes' and usually omitting middle causes.
[Bacon's point is: They discuss the ﬁrst cause of the whole universe, and the end or
purpose for which something happens (its 'ﬁnal cause'), but they mostly ignore
ordinary causes such as spark's causing a ﬁre. Putting this in terms of ﬁrst-middle-
ﬁnal seems to be a quiet joke].
We should be extremely cautious about this. There's nothing worse than the
deiﬁcation of error, and it is a downright plague of the intellect when empty nonsense
is treated with veneration. Yet some of the moderns have been so tolerant of this
emptiness that they have—what a shallow performance!—tried to base a system of
natural philosophy on the ﬁrst chapter of Genesis, on the book of Job, and other parts
of the sacred writings, 'seeking the living among the dead' [Luke 24:5]. This makes it
more important than ever to keep down this ·kind of philosophy·, because this
unhealthy mixture of human and divine gives rise not only to •fantastic philosophy
but also to •heretical religion. It is very proper that we soberly give our faith only to
things that are the faith.
66. So much for the mischievous authority of systems founded on •vulgar notions, on
•a few experiments, or on •superstition. I should say something about bad choices of
what to think about, especially in natural philosophy. In the mechanical arts the main
way in which bodies are altered is by composition or separation; the human intellect
sees this and is infected by it, thinking that something like it produces all alteration in
the universe. This gave rise to •the ﬁction of elements and of their coming together to
form natural bodies. Another example: When a man surveys nature working freely, he
encounters diﬀerent species of things—of animals, of plants, of minerals—and that
leads him smoothly on to the opinion that nature contains certain primary forms which
nature intends to work with, and that all other variety comes from •nature's being
blocked and side-tracked in her work, or from •conﬂicts between diﬀerent species—
conﬂicts in which one species turns into another. To the ﬁrst of these theories we owe
·such intellectual rubbish as· ﬁrst qualities of the elements; to the second we owe

occult properties and speciﬁc virtues. Both of them are empty short-cuts, ways for the
mind to come to rest and not be bothered with more solid pursuits. The medical
researchers have achieved more through their work on the second qualities of matter,
and the operations of attracting, repelling, thinning, thickening, expanding,
contracting, scattering, ripening and the like; and they would have made much
greater progress still if *it weren't for a disaster that occurred. The two short-cuts that
I have mentioned (elementary qualities and speciﬁc virtues) snared the medical
researchers, and spoiled what they did with their correct observations in their own
ﬁeld.
[The passage ﬂagged by asterisks expands what Bacon wrote, in ways that the small-
dots system can't easily indicate.]
It led them either •to treating second qualities as coming from highly complex and
subtle mixture of ﬁrst or elementary qualities, or •to breaking oﬀ their empirical work
prematurely, not following up their observations of second qualities with greater and
more diligent observations of third and fourth qualities.* ·This is a bigger disaster than
you might think, because· something like—I don't say exactly like—the powers
involved in the self-healing of the human body should be looked for also in the
changes of all other bodies.
But something much worse than that went wrong in their work: they focused on
the principles governing things at rest, not on •the principles of change; i.e. on
what things are produced from, not •how they are produced; i.e. on
topics that they could talk about, not •ones that would lead to results.
The vulgar classiﬁcation of ·kinds of· motion that we ﬁnd in the accepted system of
natural philosophy is no good—I mean the classiﬁcation into
generation,
corruption,
growth,
diminution,
alteration, and
motion.
Here is what they mean. If a body is moved from one place to another without
changing in any other way, this is •motion; if a body changes qualitatively while
continuing to belong to the same species and not changing its place, this is
•alteration; if a change occurs through which the mass and quantity of the body don't
remain the same, this is •growth or •diminution; if a body is changed so much that it
changes substantially and comes to belong to a diﬀerent species, this is •generation
or •corruption. But all this is merely layman's stuﬀ, which doesn't go at all deeply into
nature; for these are only measures of motion. . . .and not kinds of motion. They [=
the notions involved in the classiﬁcation into generation, corruption etc.] signify that
the motion went this way or that, but not how it happened or what caused it. They tell
us nothing about the appetites of bodies [= 'what bodies are naturally disposed to
do'] or about what their parts are up to. They come into play only when the motion in
question makes the thing grossly and obviously diﬀerent from how it was. Even when
·scientists who rely on the above classiﬁcatory system· do want to indicate something
concerning the causes of motion, and to classify motions on that basis, they very
lazily bring in the ·Aristotelian· distinction between 'natural' motion and 'violent'
motion, a distinction that comes entirely from vulgar ways of thinking. In fact, 'violent'

motion is natural motion that is called 'violent' because it involves an external cause
working (naturally!) in a diﬀerent way from how it was working previously.
[Bacon himself sometimes describes a movement as violens, but this is meant quite
casually and not as a concept belonging to basic physics. These innocent occurrences
of violens will be translated as 'forceful'.]
Let us set all this aside, and consider such observations as that bodies have an
appetite for
mutual contact, so that separations can't occur that would break up the unity of
nature and allow a vacuum to be made;
or for
resuming their natural dimensions. . . ., so that if they are compressed within or
extended beyond those limits they immediately try to recover themselves and
regain their previous size;
or for
gathering together with masses of their own kind—e.g. dense bodies ·moving·
towards the earth, and light and rare bodies towards the dome of the sky.
These and their like are truly physical kinds of motion; and comparison of them with
the others that I mentioned makes clear that the others are entirely logical and
scholastic.
An equally bad feature of their philosophies and their ways of thinking is that all their
work goes into investigating and theorizing about the
fundamental· principles of things. . . .—so they keep moving through higher and
higher levels of abstraction until they come to formless potential matter—and
the ultimate parts of nature—so they keep cutting up nature more and more
ﬁnely until they come to atoms, which are too small to contribute anything to
human welfare—
whereas everything that is useful, everything that can be worked with, lies between
·those two extremes·.
67. The intellect should be warned against the intemperate way in which systems of
philosophy deal with the giving or withholding of assent, because intemperance of this
kind seems to establish idols and somehow prolong their life, leaving no way open to
reach and dislodge them.
There are two kinds of excess: •the excess of those who are quick to come to
conclusions, and make sciences dogmatic and lordly; and •the excess of those who
deny that we can know anything, and so lead us into an endlessly wandering kind of
research. The •former of these subdues the intellect, the •latter deprives it of energy.
The philosophy of Aristotle ·is of the former kind·. Having destroyed all the other
philosophies in argumentative battle. . . . Aristotle laid down the law about everything,
and then proceeded to raise new questions of his own and to dispose of them likewise,
so that everything would be certain and settled—a way of going about things that his
followers still respect and practice.

The ·Old Academy·, the school of Plato, introduced acatalepsy—·the doctrine that
nothing is capable of being understood·. At ﬁrst it was meant as an ironical joke at the
expense of the older sophists—Protagoras, Hippias, and the rest—whose greatest fear
was to seem not to doubt something! But the New Academy made a dogma of
acatalepsy, holding it as oﬃcial doctrine. They did allow of some things to be followed
as probable, though not to be accepted as true; and they said they didn't ·mean to·
destroy all investigation; so their attitude was better than. . . .that of Pyrrho and his
sceptics. (It was also better than undue freedom in making pronouncements.) Still,
once the human mind has despaired of ﬁnding truth, it becomes less interested in
everything; with the result that men are side-tracked into pleasant disputations and
discourses, into roaming, rather than severely sticking to a single course of inquiry.
But, as I said at the start and continue to urge, the human senses and intellect, weak
as they are, should not be •deprived of their authority but •given help.
68. So much for the separate classes of idols and their trappings. We should solemnly
and ﬁrmly resolve to deny and reject them all, cleansing our intellect by freeing it
from them. Entering the kingdom of man, which is based on the sciences, is like
entering the kingdom of heaven, which one can enter only as a little child.
Edited: The next post in the sequence, Book 1: 69-92 (13 Causes of Bad Science), will
be posted Thursday, October 3rd at latest by 6:00pm PDT.

13 Causes of Bad Science (Novum
Organum Book 1: 69-92)
This is the sixth post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see the
sequence introduction.
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
Ruby's Reading Guide
Novum Organum is organized as two books each containing numbered
"aphorisms." These vary in length from three lines to sixteen pages. Bracketed
titles of posts in this sequence, e.g. Idols of the Mind Pt. 1, are my own and do not
appear in the original.
While the translator, Bennett, encloses his editorial remarks in a single pair of
[brackets], I have enclosed mine in a [[double pair of brackets]].
Bennett's Reading Guide
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has
been added, but can be read as though it were part of the original text. Occasional
•bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not quotations, are meant as aids
to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis . . . .
indicates the omission of a brief passage that seems to present more diﬃculty
than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported between brackets in normal-sized
type.

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 1: 69-
92
by Francis Bacon
[[Bacon continues on from the discussion of Idols of the Mind. Demonstration might be
interpreted simply as experiment, but is likely closer to meaning of Aristotle's
demonstrations: a scientiﬁc deduction where one moves from premises in which one
has high conﬁdence to new conclusions.]]
69. But the idols have defences and strongholds, namely defective demonstrations;
and the demonstrations we have in dialectics do little except make •the world a slave
to •human thought, and make human thought a slave to •words. Demonstrations are
indeed incipient philosophies and sciences: how good or bad a demonstration is
determines how good or bad will be the system of philosophy and the thoughts that
follow it. Now the demonstrations that we use in our whole process of getting from the
•senses and •things to •axioms and conclusions are defective and inappropriate. This
process has four parts, with a fault in each of them. (1) The impressions of the senses
itself are faulty, for the senses omit things and deceive us. Their omissions should be
made up for, and their deceptions corrected. (2) Notion are abstracted badly from the
impressions of the senses, and are vague and confused where they should be deﬁnite
and clearly bounded.
(3) Induction goes wrong when it infers scientiﬁc principles by simple enumeration,
and doesn't, as it should, take account of the exceptions and distinctions that nature
is entitled to. (4) The method of discovery and proof in which you ﬁrst state the most
general principles and then bring the intermediate axioms into the story, 'proving'
them from the general principles, is the mother of errors and a disaster for all the
sciences. At this stage I merely touch on these matters. I'll discuss them more fully
when, after performing these cleansings and purgings of the mind, I come to present
the true way of interpreting nature.
70. The procedure that starts with experience and sticks close to it is the best
demonstration by far. A procedure that involves transferring a result to other cases
that are judged to be similar is defective unless the transfer is made by a sound and
orderly process. The way men conduct experiments these days is blind and stupid.
Wandering and rambling with no settled course and only such 'plans' as events force
on them, they cast about and touch on many matters, but don't get far with them.
Sometimes they are eager, sometimes distracted; and they always ﬁnd that some
further question arises. They usually conduct their experiments casually, as though
this were just a game; they slightly vary experiments that are already known; and if
an experiment doesn't come oﬀ, they grow weary and give up the attempt. And even
if they worked harder at their experiments, applying themselves more seriously and
steadfastly, ·they still wouldn't get far, because· they work away at some one
experiment, as Gilbert did with the magnet and the chemists do with gold. That is a
way of proceeding that is as unskilful as it is feeble. For no-one successfully
investigates the nature of a thing taken on its own; the inquiry needs to be enlarged
so as to become more general.

And even when they try to draw some science, some doctrines, from their
experiments, they usually turn aside and rashly embark on premature questions of
practical application; not only for the practical beneﬁts of such applications, but also
because they want to do things that will •assure them that it will be worth their while
to go on, and •show themselves in a good light to the world and so •raise the credit of
the project they are engaged in. They are behaving like Atalanta ·in the legend from
ancient Greece·: she turned aside to chase a golden ball, interrupting her running of
the race and letting victory slip through her ﬁngers. But in using the true course of
experience to carry out new works, we should model our behaviour on the divine
wisdom and order. On the ﬁrst day of creation God created light and nothing else,
devoting an entire day to a work in which no material substance was created. We
should follow suit: with experience of any kind, we should ﬁrst try to discover true
causes and axioms, looking for •enlightening experiments rather than for •practically
fruitful ones. For axioms don't singly prepare the way for practical applications, but
clusters of rightly discovered and established axioms do so, bringing in their wake
streams—crowds!—of practical works. The paths of experience are just as rocky and
jammed as the paths of judgment, and I'll discuss that later. I have mentioned
ordinary experimental work at this stage only in its role as a bad kind of
demonstration. But considerations of order now demand that I take up next ·two
linked topics·: •the signs or omens (mentioned a little way back) that current systems
of philosophy and of thought are in a bad condition; and •the causes of ·this badness,
which· seems at ﬁrst so strange and incredible. When you have seen •the signs you
will be more likely to agree ·with me about the badness·; and my explanation of •its
causes will make it seem less strange. These two together will greatly help to render
the process of wiping the idols from the intellect easier and smoother. ·My discussion
of •the signs will run to the end of 77, and •the causes will run from there to the
middle of 92·.
[In the next seven sections, the Latin signa will be translated sometimes as 'signs' and
sometimes as 'omens'.]
71. The sciences that we have come mostly from the Greeks. For the additions by
Roman, Arabic and later writers are neither plentiful nor important, and such as they
are they have been built on the foundation of Greek discoveries. Now, the wisdom of
the Greeks was that of teachers of rhetoric, and it spawned disputations, which made
it the worst kind of inquiry for ﬁnding the truth. Those who wanted to be thought of as
philosophers contemptuously gave the label 'sophists' to the ancient rhetoricians
Gorgias, Protagoras, Hippias and Polus; but really the label ﬁts the whole lot of them:
Plato, Aristotle, Zeno, Epicurus, Theophrastus, and their successors Chrysippus,
Carneades and so on. There was this just diﬀerence: •the rhetoricians were wandering
and mercenary, going from town to town, oﬀering their wisdom for sale, and taking a
price for it; whereas •the others were more ceremonial and 'proper'—men who had
settled homes, and who opened schools and taught their philosophy without charging
for it. But although the two groups of philosophers were in other ways unalike, they
had one thing in common: both lots were teachers of rhetoric; both turned everything
into a matter for disputations, and created sects that they defended against heresies.
They turned it all into •'the talk of idle old men to ignorant youths' (Dionysius's jibe
against Plato, a not unfair one!). But the earlier of the Greek philosophers—
Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Leucippus, Democritus, Parmenides, Heraclitus,
Xenophanes, Philolaus and so on (omitting Pythagoras because he was a mystic)—
didn't open schools, as far as we know. What they did was to apply themselves to the
discovery of truth, doing this
more quietly, severely and simply—that is, with less aﬀectation and parade—

than the others did. And in my judgment they also performed
more successfully,
·or would have done so· if it weren't for the fact that their works were in the course of
time obscured by less substantial people who oﬀered more of what suits and pleases
the capacity and tastes of the vulgar. Time is like a river, bringing lightweight ﬂoating
stuﬀ down to us and letting heavier and solider things sink. Still, not even they—
·Empedocles and the rest·—were entirely free of the Greek fault: they leaned too far in
the direction of ambition and vanity, founding sects and aiming for popular applause.
The inquiry after •truth has no chance of succeeding when it veers oﬀ after •triﬂes of
this kind. And I ought to mention the judgment, or rather the prediction, that an
Egyptian priest made about the Greeks, namely that 'they are always boys, with no
•long-established knowledge and no •knowledge of ancient times' [neater in Latin:
•antiquitatem scientiae and •scientiam antiquitatis]. Assuredly they were like boys in
their readiness to chatter, and in their inability to father anything—for their wisdom is
full of words but sterile in works. So when we consider the currently accepted
philosophy in the light of its place of origin and its family tree, the omens are not
good!
72. And the omens provided by the character of the time and age aren't much better
than the ones from the character of the place and the nation. For knowledge at that
period concerned only a short stretch of time and a small part of the world, and that's
the worst state to be in, especially for those who base everything on experience. For
the preceding thousand years they had no history worthy of the name, but only fables
and verbal traditions. And they knew only a small portion of the regions and districts
of the world; they indiscriminately called everyone to the north of them 'Scythians'.
and those to the west 'Celts'; they knew nothing of Africa beyond the nearest part of
Ethiopia, or of Asia beyond the Ganges. They knew even less about the provinces of
the New World. . . .and declared to be uninhabitable a multitude of climates and zones
where actually countless nations live and breathe. . . . (Contrast that with the present
day: we know many parts of the New World as well as the whole of the Old World, and
our stock of experience has grown inﬁnitely.) So if like astrologers we take omens ·for
contemporary systems of philosophy· from the facts about when they were born, we
can't predict anything great for them.
73. Of all the signs ·we can have of the value of a ﬁeld of endeavour·, none are more
certain or more conspicuous than those based on the upshots ·of the endeavour·. For
upshots and useful practical applications are like sponsors and guarantors of the truth
of philosophies. [Throughout this work, 'philosophies' include 'sciences'.] Now, from all
those systems of the Greeks and the particular sciences derived from them, you can
hardly name a single experiment that •points the way to some improvement in the
condition of man, and that •really does come from the speculations and theories of
philosophy. Hardly one, after all those years! And Celsus honestly and sensibly admits
as much, when he tells us that •the practical part of medicine was discovered ﬁrst,
and that then •men philosophized about it and hunted for and assigned causes; rather
than the reverse process in which •philosophy and the knowledge of causes led to
•the discovery and development of the practical part. So it isn't strange that among
the Egyptians, who rewarded inventors with divine honours and sacred rites, there
were more images of the lower animals than of men; for the lower animals have made
many discoveries through their natural instincts, whereas men have given birth to few
or none through their discussions and rational inferences.

The work of chemists has produced a little, but only •accidentally and in passing or
else •by varying previous experiments (just as a mechanic might do!), and not by any
skill or any theory. For the theory that they have devised does more to confuse the
experiments than to help them. And the people who have busied themselves with so-
called 'natural magic' have come up with nothing but a few triﬂing and apparently
faked results. In religion we are warned to show our faith by our works; the same rule
applies in philosophy, where a system should be judged by its fruits, and pronounced
frivolous if it turns out to be barren, especially when it bears the thorns and thistles of
dispute and contention rather than the fruits of grape and olive.
74. The growth and progress of systems and sciences provides signs ·as to their
value·. Something that is grounded in nature grows and increases, while what is based
on opinion alters but doesn't grow. If those doctrines ·of the ancient Greeks· hadn't
been so utterly like a plant torn up by its roots, and had remained attached to and
nourished by the womb of nature, the state of aﬀairs that we have seen to obtain for
two thousand years—namely
the sciences stayed in the place where they began, hardly changing, not getting any
additions worth mentioning, thriving best in the hands of their ﬁrst founders and
declining from then on
—would never have come about. This is the opposite of what happens with the
mechanical arts, which are based on nature and the light of experience: they (as long
as they ﬁnd favour with people) continually thrive and grow, having a special kind of
spirit in them, so that they are at ﬁrst rough and ready, then manageable, from then
onwards made smoothly convenient by use—and always growing.
75. Admissions made by the very authorities whom men now follow constitute
another sign ·that today's sciences are in trouble·—if it is all right to apply the label
'sign' to what is really testimony, indeed the most reliable of all testimony. Even those
who so conﬁdently pronounce on everything do intermittently pull themselves
together and complain of the subtlety of nature, the obscurity of things, and the
weakness of the human mind. ·These complaints are not just a sign of trouble in the
sciences; they are worded in such a way that they cause further harm·. If these people
merely complained, some cowards might be deterred from searching further, while
others with livelier minds and a more hopeful spirit might be spurred and incited to go
on. But the complainers don't merely speak for themselves: if something is beyond
their knowledge or reach, and of their master's, they declare it to be beyond the
bounds of possibility, something that can't be known or done; so that their lofty ill-
nature turns the weakness of their own 'discoveries' into a libel against nature herself
and a source of despair for the rest of the world. •Thus the school of the New
Academy, which doomed men to everlasting darkness by maintaining as a matter of
doctrine that nothing at all could be known. •Thus the opinion that men can't possibly
discover the forms, i.e. the real diﬀerentiae of things ·that put things into diﬀerent
species· (really they are laws of pure action [see note here]). •Thus also certain
opinions in the ﬁeld of action and operation, e.g. that the heat of the sun is quite
diﬀerent in kind from the heat of ﬁre, so that no-one will think that the operations of
ﬁre could produce anything like the works of nature ·that are produced by the sun·.
•That's the source of the view that. . .
Latin: . . . compositionem tantum opus hominis, mistionem vero opus solius naturae
esse

literal meaning: . . . men are capable only of composition, and mixing has to be the
work of nature
intended meaning? . . . men are capable only of assembling things into physical
mixtures (e.g. salt and pepper), and the subtler kind of combination involved in
something's being gold or water or salt or the like must be the work of nature
—lest men should hope to develop techniques for generating or transforming natural
bodies, ·e.g. creating water or turning lead into gold·. ·I point out· this sign ·of second-
rateness· to warn you not to let your work and your career get mixed up with dogmas
that are not merely discouraging but are dedicated to discouragement.
76. Here is another sign ·of something's being wrong· that I oughtn't to pass over: the
fact that formerly there existed among philosophers such great disagreement, and
such diﬀerences between one school and another. This shows well enough that the
road from the senses to the intellect was not well defended ·with walls along each
side·, when the same raw material for philosophy (namely the nature of things) has
been taken over and used to construct so many wandering pathways of error. These
days, most of the disagreements and diﬀerences of opinion on ﬁrst principles and
entire ·philosophical· systems have been extinguished; but there are still endless
questions and disputes concerning some parts of philosophy, which makes it clear
that there is nothing certain or sound in the systems themselves or in the modes of
demonstration ·that they employ·.
77. Some men think this:
There ·is great agreement in philosophy these days, because there is· widespread
agreement in assenting to the philosophy of Aristotle; as witness the fact that
once it was published the systems of earlier philosophers fell into disuse and
withered away, while in the times that followed nothing better was found. Thus, it
seems to have been so well laid out and established that it has drawn both ages—
·ancient and modern·—to itself.
[[Philosophy here likely means philosophy and science unlike in modern usage where
philosophy has been separated from science.]]
I start my reply to this by remarking that the general opinion that the old systems
stopped being used or consulted when Aristotle's works were published is false. In
fact, long afterwards—even down to the times of Cicero and later centuries—the
works of the old philosophers still remained. But in the times that followed, when the
ﬂood of barbarians pouring into the Roman empire made a shipwreck of human
learning, then the systems of Aristotle and Plato, like planks of lighter and less solid
material, ﬂoated on the waves of time and were preserved. As for the point about
agreed assent: if you look into this more carefully you'll see that the view I am
discussing is wrong about that too. For genuine agreement is based on people's
having duly examined some matter and reached, freely ·and independently·, the same
opinion about it. But the great majority of those who have assented to the philosophy
of Aristotle have delivered themselves over to it on the strength of the prejudices and
the authority of others; so that this is less a case of agreement than of moving
together as a crowd. But even if it had been a real and widespread agreement, that is
so far from being •solid conﬁrmation of the truth ·of Aristotle's philosophy· that it
actually creates a •strong presumption of its falsity. For in intellectual matters the
worst of all auguries is ·general· consent, except in theology (and in politics, where
there is a right to vote!). This is because of something I have already mentioned: that

nothing pleases the multitude unless it appeals to the imagination or ties the intellect
up with knots made from the notions of the vulgar. Something that Phocion said about
morals can very well be re-applied to intellectual matters, namely that if the multitude
accept ·what you say· and are united in their applause, you should immediately check
yourself to see where you have gone wrong. So this sign is one of the least favourable.
That brings me to the end of what I have to say to make my point that the signs of
health and truth in the currently accepted philosophical systems and sciences are not
good, whether they be drawn from their origins (71-2), their upshots (73), their
progress (74), the admissions of their founders (75), or agreed acceptance (77).
78. I now come to the causes of these errors—so many of them, and such bad ones!—
that have continued on through all those centuries. ·My discussion of thirteen of them
will run on through 92·. You may have been wondering how the points I have made
could have escaped men's notice until now; my account of the causes should stop you
wondering about that. When you understand the causes, you may have something
else to be surprised by, namely the fact that someone has now seen through the
errors, thought about them, and come up with my points against them. As for that, I
see it as coming from my good luck rather than from my superior talents; it's not that
I am so clever, but rather that I was born at the right time.
(1) The ﬁrst point ·about how long the errors went undetected· is this: If you look hard
at 'all those centuries' you'll see that they shrink into something quite small. We have
memories and records of twenty-ﬁve, and of those you can hardly pick out six that
were fertile in the sciences or favourable to their development. (There are wastelands
and deserts in times just as in regions of the earth!) We can properly count only three
periods when learning ﬂourished, and they lasted barely two centuries each: that of
•the Greeks, the second of •the Romans, and the last among us—•the nations of
western Europe. The intervening ages of the world were not ﬂourishing or fertile for
the growth of knowledge. (Don't cite the Arabs or the schoolmen ·as counter-examples
to that·; for they spent the intervening times not •adding to the weightiness of the
sciences but crushing them with the weight of their books!) So there is one cause for
the lack of progress in the sciences, namely the brevity of the periods that can
properly be said to have been favourable to them.
79. (2) Here is a second cause, and one of great all-around importance: Precisely at
the times when human intelligence and learning have ﬂourished most, or indeed
ﬂourished at all, men didn't work at natural philosophy [here = 'natural science']. Yet
it should have been regarded as the great mother of the sciences; because all arts
and all sciences, though they may be polished and shaped and made ﬁt for use, won't
grow at all if they are torn from this root ·of natural philosophy·. It is clear that after
the Christian religion was generally accepted and grew strong, the vast majority of the
best minds applied themselves to theology, that this oﬀered the best promise of
reward and the most abundant research support of all kinds, and that this focus on
theology was the chief occupation ·of able people· in western Europe during the third
period ·of the three I have named·—all the more so because at about the same time
literacy began to be more widespread and religious controversies sprang up. During
the Roman period—the second of my trio—philosophers mostly worked on and
thought about moral philosophy, which was to the pagans what theology is to us. Also,
in those times the best intelligences usually devoted themselves to public aﬀairs,
because the sheer size of the Roman empire required the services of a great many
people. And—·moving back to the ﬁrst of my trio·—there was only a tiny portion of
time when natural philosophy was seen to ﬂourish among the Greeks; for in earlier
times all except Thales of the so-called 'seven wise men' applied themselves to

morals and politics; and in later times, when Socrates had drawn philosophy from
heaven down to earth, moral philosophy became more fashionable than ever and
diverted men's minds from the philosophy of nature.
And right at the time when inquiries into nature were carried on energetically, they
were spoiled and made useless by controversies and the ambitious display of new
opinions. During those three periods, then, natural philosophy was largely neglected
or impeded, so it's no wonder that men made so little progress with something that
they weren't attending to.
[This is the ﬁrst of eleven remarks along the lines of 'No wonder science hasn't
progressed, given the fact that. . . '—one for each of Bacon's causes of non-progress
except the ﬁrst and last.]
80. (3) I would add that especially in recent times natural philosophy, even among
those who have attended to it, has scarcely ever had anyone's complete and full-time
attention (except perhaps a monk studying in his cell, or an aristocrat burning the
midnight oil in his country house); it has usually been treated as merely a bridge
leading to something else. And so ·natural philosophy·, that great mother of the
sciences, has been subjected to the astonishing indignity of being degraded to the
role of a servant, having to help medicine or mathematics in their aﬀairs, and to give
the immature minds of teen-agers a ﬁrst dip in a sort of dye, to make them better able
to absorb some other dye later on. Meanwhile don't look for much progress in the
sciences—especially in their practical part—unless natural philosophy is applied to
particular sciences, and particular sciences are applied back again to natural
philosophy. It is because this hasn't been done that many of the sciences have no
depth and merely glide over the surface of things. What sciences? Well, astronomy,
optics, music, many of the mechanical arts, even medicine itself—and, more
surprisingly, moral and political philosophy and the logical sciences. Because once
these particular sciences have become widespread and established, they are no
longer nourished by natural philosophy, which could have given them fresh strength
and growth drawn from the well-springs—from true thoughts about
motions, rays, sounds and textures, and
microstructures of bodies [Bacon's many uses of the word schematismus show
that for him a body's schematismus is its ﬁne-grained structure. This version will
always use 'microstructure', but be aware that Bacon doesn't use a word with
the preﬁx 'micro'.], and
feelings and intellectual processes.
So it's not at all strange that the sciences don't grow, given that they have been cut
oﬀ from their roots.
81. (4) Another great and powerful cause why the sciences haven't progressed much
is this: You can't run a race properly when the ﬁnishing-post hasn't been properly
positioned and ﬁxed in place. Now the true and lawful ﬁnishing-post of the sciences is
just new discoveries and powers in the service of human life. But the great majority of
the mob ·of supposed scientists· have no feeling for this, and are merely hired
lecturers. Well, occasionally some ambitious practitioner who is abler than most
spends his own resources on some new invention; but most men are so far from
aiming to add anything to the arts and sciences that they don't even attend to what's
already there or take from it anything that they can't use in their lectures or use in the
pursuit of money or fame or the like. And when one of that multitude does pay court
to science with honest aﬀection and for her own sake, even then it turns out that what

attracts him is not the stern and unbending search for truth so much as the richness
of the array of thoughts and doctrines. And if there should happen to be one who
pursues the truth in earnest, even he will be going after •truths that will satisfy his
intellect by explaining the causes of things long since discovered, and not •truths that
hold promise of new practical applications or •the new light of axioms. If the •end of
the sciences hasn't yet been placed properly, it isn't strange that men have gone
wrong concerning the •means.
82. (5) So men have mislocated the end and ﬁnishing-post of the sciences; but even
if they hadn't, their route to it is completely wrong and impassable. When you think
about it carefully, it is amazing that •no mortal has cared enough or thought hard
enough to lay out a securely walled road leading to the human intellect directly from
the senses and experiment, and that •everything has been left either to the mists of
tradition, or the whirl and eddy of argument, or the waves and mazes of random and
fragmentary experience. Think about this soberly and carefully: What route have men
customarily travelled in investigating and discovering things? No doubt what you will
ﬁrst come up with is a very simple and naive discovery procedure, the most usual one,
namely this:
A man is bracing himself to make a discovery about something: ﬁrst he seeks out
and surveys everything that has been said about it by others; then he starts
to think for himself; shaking up his mind and, as it were, praying to it to give him
oracular pronouncements
—a 'method' that has no foundation at all, rests only on opinions, and goes where
they go. Another man may perhaps call on dialectics to make his discovery for him,
but the discoveries that dialectics is good for are irrelevant to what we are discussing
—there's nothing in common except the word 'discovery'.
[Regarding the passage between *asterisks*: Bacon writes of 'arts' but doesn't give
examples (medicine and ship-building). This text also expands his in other ways that
·dots· can't easily indicate.]
*Arts such as medicine and ship-building are made up of principles and axioms, and
dialectics doesn't discover these; all it can 'discover', given that you have the
principles and axioms from some other source, is what else is consistent with them. If
we try to insist on more than that, demanding that dialectics tell us what the
•principles and axioms are, we all know that it will ﬂing the demand back in our faces:
'For •them you must trust the art in question. For the foundations of medicine, for
example, don't ask dialectics, ask medicine!'* ·Setting aside the opinions of others,
and dialectics·, there remains simple experience—which we call 'experiment' if we
were trying to produce it, and 'chance' if we weren't. But such experience is no better
than a broom with loose bristles, as the saying is—·those who steer by it are· like men
in the dark, patting the walls as they go along hoping to ﬁnd their way, when they'd
have done much better to wait for daylight, or light a candle, and then set oﬀ. But
experience managed in the right •order ﬁrst lights the candle and then uses it to
show the way. It starts with experience that is ordered and classiﬁed, not jumbled or
erratic; from that it derives axioms, and from established axioms it moves on to new
experiments; just as God proceeded in an •orderly way when he worked on matter. So
don't be surprised that science hasn't yet reached the end of its journey, seeing that
men have gone altogether astray, either abandoning experience entirely, or getting
lost in it and wandering around as in a maze. Whereas a rightly ordered method leads
by an unbroken route through the thickets of experience to the open ground of
axioms.

83. This trouble ·concerning not-ﬁnding-the-way· has been greatly increased by an old
and harmful opinion or fancy, namely the self-important view that it is beneath the
dignity of the human mind to be closely involved with experiments on particular
material things given through the senses— especially as they are
hard work to investigate,
trivial to think about,
nasty to report on,
not suitable things for a gentleman to perform,
inﬁnite in number, and
full of extremely small-scale details.
So that it has ﬁnally come to this: the true way is not merely departed from but
blocked oﬀ. It's not that experience has been abandoned or badly handled; rather, it
has been fastidiously kept at arm's length.
84. (6) Men have been kept back from making progress in the sciences, as though by
a magic spell, by •their reverence for antiquity, by •the authority of men of high
standing in philosophy, and then by •the general acceptance ·of certain propositions·.
I have spoken of the last of these ·in 77· above.
As for 'antiquity', the opinion that men have about it is a lazy one that does violence
to the meaning of the word. For really what is antique is •the world in its old age, that
is the world now; and •the earlier age of the world when the ancients lived, though in
relation to us it was the elder, in relation to the world it was the younger. We expect
•an old man to know more about the human condition than •a young man does, and
to make more mature judgments about it, because of his experience and the number
and variety of things he has seen, heard and thought about. In the same way, more
could be fairly expected from •our age (if only we knew and chose to employ its
strength) than from •ancient times, because ours is a more advanced age of the
world, and has accumulated countless experiments and observations.
It is also relevant that through long voyages many things in nature will be discovered
that may let in new light on philosophy (and such voyages will be increasingly
frequent in our age). And given that the regions of the •material domain—i.e. of the
earth, the sea and the stars—have been opened up and brought to light, it would
surely be disgraceful if the •intellectual domain remained shut up within the narrow
limits of old discoveries.
And with regard to authority: there is something feeble about granting so much to
•authors while denying •time its rights—time, which is the author of authors, or rather
of all authority. For the saying is 'Truth is the daughter of time', not '. . . the daughter
of authority'!
We shouldn't be surprised, then, when we ﬁnd that the enchantments of •antiquity
and •authority and •general agreement have tied up men's powers—as though
putting them under a spell—making them unable to rub shoulders with •things
themselves.
85. (7) What brings man's work to a halt in face of the discoveries that have already
been made is not merely his admiration for antiquity, authority and general
agreement, but also his admiration for the long-time achievements of the human race.
When you look at the variety and beauty of the devices that the mechanical arts have
assembled for men's use, you'll surely be more inclined to admire man's wealth than
to have any sense of his poverty! You won't take into account the fact that

the original human observations and natural processes (which are the soul and
ﬁrst mover of all that variety)
are not many and didn't have to be dug deeply for; and that apart from them it has
been merely a matter of
patience, and the orderly and precise movements of hands and tools.
For example, it certainly takes precise and accurate work to make a clock, whose
wheels seem to imitate the heavenly bodies and, in their alternating and orderly
motion, to imitate the pulse of animals; but ·there isn't much scientiﬁc content in this,
because the entire mechanism· depends on only a couple of axioms of nature.
[Bacon next writes about 'the reﬁnement of the liberal arts' and of the 'art' that goes
into 'the mechanical preparation of natural substances', and lists the achievements in
astronomy, music, language, the alphabet ('still not used in China'), the making of
beer, wine and bread, and so on. His point is that these achievements took centuries
of tinkering, and that they involve very little in the way of genuinely scientiﬁc
knowledge. So they—like the clock—make it less appropriate to wonder at how much
we know than to wonder at how little. Then:]
If you turn from the workshop to the library, and wonder at the immense variety of
books you see there, just look carefully into their contents and your amazement will
be ﬂipped: having seen their endless repetitions, and seen how men are always
saying and doing what has been said and done before, you'll pass from •admiration at
the variety to •astonishment at the poverty and scantiness of the subjects that have
so far possessed the minds of men.
[Next Bacon comments derisively on the intellectual poverty of alchemy. Then:] The
students of natural magic, who explain everything by 'sympathies' and 'antipathies',
have in their lazy conjectures credited substances with having wonderful powers and
operations. If they have ever they produced any results, they have been more
productive of astonishment than of anything useful. [Followed by a slap at
'superstitious magic'; Bacon expresses some embarrassment at even mentioning this,
as he does with alchemy. Finally:] It isn't surprising that the belief that one has a great
deal has been a cause of our having very little.
86. (8) Furthermore, men's feeble and almost childish admiration for doctrines and
arts has been increased by the tricks and devices of those who have practised and
taught the sciences. For they produce them with so much fuss and ﬂourish, putting
them before the world all dressed up and masked ·and seemingly ready to go·, as
though they were wholly complete and ﬁnished. Just look at the structure and the
classiﬁcations they bring with them! They seem to cover everything that could come
up in that subject, and to the minds of the vulgar they present the form and plan of a
perfected science; but really the classiﬁcatory units are little more than empty
bookshelves. The earliest seekers after truth did better than this. Their thoughts about
things resulted in knowledge that they want to set down for later use, and they did
this in aphorisms—i.e. short unconnected sentences, not linked by any method—and
didn't pretend or profess to cover the entire art. But given the way things are these
days, it's not surprising that men don't try to make further progress in matters that
have been passed down to them as long since perfect and complete.
87. (9) The •ancient systems have also gained considerably in their reputation and
credit from the empty-headed foolishness of those who have propounded •new ones,
especially in the area of applied science. There has been no shortage of talkers and

dreamers who—partly believing what they say and partly not—have loaded mankind
with promises, oﬀering the means to
prolong life,
slow down the aging process,
lessen pain,
repair natural defects,. . . .
control and arouse aﬀections,
sharpen and heighten the intellectual faculties,
turn substances into other substances (·e.g. lead into gold·),
make things move, or move faster, at will,
make changes in the air,
arrange for inﬂuence from the stars,
prophesy the future,
make things visible from a long way oﬀ,
reveal things that are hidden,
and many more. With regard to these 'benefactors' it wouldn't be unfair to say that
•their absurdities diﬀer as much from •true arts (in the eyes of the philosopher) as
•the exploits of Julius Caesar or Alexander the Great diﬀer from •those of ·such
ﬁctional characters as· Amadis of Gaul or the Knights of the Round Table. . . . It isn't
surprising that prejudice is raised against new propositions, especially ones that are
said to have practical implications, because of those impostors who have tried
something similar. . . .
[[Bacon seems to speaking of idea inoculation here where people have been
inoculated against new sciences because of the charlatans promising things they fail
to deliver.]]
88. (10) Far more harm has been done to knowledge by pettiness, and the smallness
and triviality of the tasks that men have tackled. It is made worse by the fact that this
pettiness comes with a certain air of arrogance and superiority. A now-familiar general
device that is found in all the arts is this: the author blames nature for any weakness
in his art, declaring—on the authority of his art!—that whatever his art can't achieve is
intrinsically impossible. ['Art' refers to any human activity that involves techniques
and requires skills.] If arts are to be their own judges, then clearly none will be found
guilty! Moreover, the philosophy that is now in play hugs to itself certain tenets whose
purpose. . . .is to persuade men that we can't expect art or human labour to come up
with any results that are hard to get, requiring that nature be commanded and
subdued. The doctrine that the sun's heat and ﬁre's heat diﬀer in kind is an example
of this, and another is the doctrine about mixture—both mentioned earlier, ·in 75·. If
you think about it carefully you'll see that all this involves a wrong limiting of human
power; it tends—and is meant to tend—to produce an unnatural despair; and this not
only messes up the auguries that might give hope but also cuts the sinews and spurs
of industry, and loads the dice against experience itself. And all for the sake of having
us think that their art has been completed, and for the miserable 'triumph' of getting
us to believe that whatever hasn't yet been discovered and understood can't ever be
discovered or understood.
And when someone does get in touch with reality and try to discover something new,
he will conﬁne himself to investigating and working out some one topic, such as
the nature of the magnet,
the tides,

mapping the heavens,
and things like that, which seem to be somewhat isolated from everything else and
have hitherto been tackled without much success; whereas really it is an ignorant
mistake to study something in isolation. Why? Because a nature that seems to be
•latent and hidden in some things is •obvious and (as it were) palpable in others, so
that people puzzle over it in •the former while nobody even notices it in •the latter.
Consider the holding-together ·of material things·. Wood and stones hold together, but
people pay no attention to that fact, merely saying of wood and stone that 'they are
solid' and giving no further thought to why they don't fall apart, breaking up their
continuity; while with water-bubbles—in which a sort of hemispherical skin is formed,
fending oﬀ for a moment the breaking up of the continuity—the holding together
seems to be a subtle matter.
In fact, what in some things is regarded as special to them ·and not present in the rest
of nature· also occurs elsewhere in an obvious and well-known form, but it won't be
recognized there as long as the experiments and thoughts of men are engaged only
on the former, ·i.e. on the less obvious and supposedly 'special' cases·. But generally
speaking, in mechanics all that is needed for someone to pass oﬀ an old result as
something new is •to reﬁne or embellish it, •to combine it with some others, •to make
it handier for practical application, •to produce the result on a larger or a smaller
scale than had been done before, or the like.
So it is no wonder that no important discoveries worthy of mankind have been
brought to light, when men have been satisﬁed—indeed pleased—with such triﬂing
and puerile tasks, and have even fancied that in them they were trying for something
great, if not achieving it.
89. (11) Bear in mind also that in every period natural philosophy has had a
troublesome and recalcitrant adversary in superstition and blind religious extremism.
Among the Greeks those who ﬁrst proposed natural causes for lightning and for
storms were condemned for disrespect towards the gods. And some of the fathers of
the early Christian church were not much milder in their attitude to those who, on
most convincing grounds that no sane person would question today, maintained that
the earth is round and thus that the antipodes exist.
Even today it is harder and more dangerous ·than it ought to be· to talk about nature,
because of the procedures of the theological schoolmen. They regularized theology as
much as they could, and worked it into the shape of an art [here = 'academic
discipline'], and then incorporated into the body of religion more of Aristotle's
contentious and thorny philosophy than would properly ﬁt there. The same result is
apt to arise, though in a diﬀerent way, from the theories of those who have been so
bold as to infer the truth of the Christian religion from the principles of •philosophers,
and to conﬁrm it by •their authority. They have solemnly and ceremonially celebrated
this union of the senses with faith as a lawful marriage, entertaining [permulcentes]
men's minds with a pleasing variety things to think about but also mixing
[permiscentes] the human with the divine in an unseemly fashion. In such mixtures of
theology with philosophy only the accepted doctrines of philosophy are included,
while •new ones—which may be changes for the better—are driven oﬀ and wiped out.
Lastly, you will ﬁnd that some ignorant divines close oﬀ access to any philosophy,
however 'puriﬁed' it may be. •Some are feebly afraid that a deeper search into nature
would take one beyond the limits of what is proper; and they take what is said in the
Scriptures against those who pry into

sacred mysteries,
wrenching it away from there and transferring it to
the hidden things of nature,
which are not fenced oﬀ by any prohibition ·in the Bible·. •Other divines are more
complex and thoughtful: they think that if middle causes [see note in 65] aren't
known then it will be easier to explain everything in terms of God's hand and rod; and
they think that this is greatly in the interests of religion, whereas really it's nothing but
trying to gratify God by a lie. •Others are led by past examples to fear that
movements and changes in philosophy will end in attacks on religion. And •others
again—·bringing us to the end of my list·—seem to be afraid that if nature is
investigated something may be found to subvert religion or at least to shake its
authority, especially with the unlearned. But these two last fears strike me as having
come from thinking at the level of the lower animals, ·like a dog cowering in fear when
it hears an unfamiliar noise·; it's as though these men in their heart of hearts weren't
sure of the strength of religion and of faith's domination of the senses, and were
therefore scared that the investigation of truth in nature might be dangerous to them.
But in point of fact natural philosophy is second only to the Bible as the best antidote
to superstition and the most approved nourishment for faith. So natural philosophy
deserves its place as religion's most faithful handmaid: religion displays God's •will,
while natural philosophy displays his •power. . . . ·Summing up·: it isn't surprising that
•natural philosophy is stunted in its growth when religion, the thing that has most
power over men's minds, has been pulled into the ﬁght against •it by the stupidity
and incautious zeal of certain people.
90. (12) Moving on now: in the customs and institutions of schools, academies,
colleges, and similar bodies whose role is to house learned men and to develop
learning, everything turns out to work against the progress of the sciences. Their
lectures and tests are devised in such a way that it would be hard for anyone to think
or speculate about anything out of the common rut. And if one or two have the
courage to judge freely, they'll have to do it all by themselves with no help from the
company of others. And if they can put up with that too, they will ﬁnd that their hard
work and breadth of mind are a considerable hindrance to their careers! For the
studies of men in these places are conﬁned—as it were imprisoned—in the writings of
certain authors, and if anyone disagrees with them he is immediately accused of
being a trouble-maker and a revolutionary. But ·this is all wrong, because· the
situation of the •arts is quite diﬀerent from that of the •state, and the coming of •new
light ·in the arts· is not like the coming of •new events ·in the state·. In matters of
state any change—even a change for the better—is under suspicion of making
trouble, because politics rests on authority, consent, fame and opinion, not on
demonstration. But arts and sciences should be like quarries, where the noise of new
works and further advances is heard on every side. That is how things stand according
to right reason, but it's not what actually happens; and the things I have reported in
the administration and government of learning severely restrain the advancement of
the sciences.
91. Indeed, even if that hostility ·towards new work· stopped, the growth of the
sciences would still be held back by the fact that high aims and hard work in this ﬁeld
go unrewarded. For the rewarding of scientiﬁc achievement and the performing of it
are not in the same hands. The growth of the sciences comes from high intelligence,
while the prizes and rewards of them are in the hands of the common people, or of
'great' persons who are nearly all quite ignorant. Moreover, not only do scientiﬁc

advances bring no rewards or other beneﬁts, they don't even get popular applause.
For the common run of people aren't up to the task of understanding such matters, so
that news about them is apt to be blown away by the gales of popular opinions. And
it's not surprising that endeavours that are not honoured don't prosper.
92. (13) By far the greatest obstacle to the progress of science—to the launching of
new projects and the opening up of new ﬁelds of inquiry—is that men despair and
think things impossible. For in these matters it's the careful, serious people who have
no conﬁdence at all, and are taken up with such thoughts as that
nature is dark,
life is short,
the senses are deceptive,
judgment is weak,
experiments are hard to do,
and the like. They think that •throughout the centuries the sciences have their ebbs
and ﬂows, sometimes growing and ﬂourishing and at others withering and decaying,
but that •a time will come when the sciences are in a state from which no further
progress will be possible. ·And they evidently think that that time lies in the very near
future·. So if anyone expects or undertakes to make further discoveries, they set this
down to his immature irresponsibility. Such endeavours, they think, start well, become
harder as they go on, and end in confusion. This is a way of thinking that sober
intelligent men are likely to fall into, and we mustn't let their charms and attractions
lead us to relax or mitigate our judgment ·of their line of thought·. We should carefully
note what gleams of hope there are and what direction they come from; and—
·changing the metaphor·—we should disregard the lighter breezes of hope but
seriously and attentively follow the winds that seem to be steadier. We must also look
to political prudence for advice, and to take the advice it gives; it is distrustful on
principle, and takes a dim view of human aﬀairs. So my topic here ·and to the end of
114· is hope; for I don't trade in promises, and don't want to aﬀect men's judgments
by force or by trickery; rather, I want to lead them by the hand without coercion. The
best way to inspire hope will be to bring men to particulars, especially ones that are
set out in an orderly way in the Tables of Discovery (partly in this work ·112-113 and
218·, but much more in the fourth part of my Great Fresh Start [see note in 31],
because this isn't merely a •hope for the thing but •the thing itself. But I want to
come at things gently, so ·instead of jumping straight to the Tables· I shall proceed
with my plan of preparing men's minds, for hope is a signiﬁcant part even of
preparation. If all the other inducements aren't accompanied by hope, their eﬀect on
men is not to •ginger them up and get them busy but rather to •make them
depressed by giving them an even darker view of how things now stand and making
them even more fully aware of the unhappiness of their own condition. So there is a
point in my revealing and recommending the views of mine that make hope in this
matter reasonable. It's like what Columbus did before his wonderful voyage across the
Atlantic, giving reasons for his belief that hitherto unknown lands and continents
might be discovered. His reasons were rejected at ﬁrst, but later they were vindicated
by experience, and were the causes and beginnings of great events.
The next post in the sequence, Book 1: 93-130 (The Baconian Method), will be posted
Thursday, October 10th at latest by 6:00pm PDT.

The Baconian Method (Novum
Organum Book 1: 93-107)
This is the seventh post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see
the sequence introduction.
In this section, Bacon lists reasons why we should believe much greater progress in
science is possible, and in doing so begins to describe his own inductivist
methodology in detail.
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
Ruby's Reading Guide
Novum Organum is organized as two books each containing numbered
"aphorisms." These vary in length from three lines to sixteen pages. Bracketed
titles of posts in this sequence, e.g. Idols of the Mind Pt. 1, are my own and do not
appear in the original.
While the translator, Bennett, encloses his editorial remarks in a single pair of
[brackets], I have enclosed mine in a [[double pair of brackets]].
Bennett's Reading Guide
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has
been added, but can be read as though it were part of the original text. Occasional
•bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not quotations, are meant as aids
to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis . . . .
indicates the omission of a brief passage that seems to present more diﬃculty
than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported between brackets in normal-sized
type.

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 1: 93-
107
by Francis Bacon
93. We have to assume that the force behind everything is God; for our subject
matter—·namely nature·—is good in such a way that it plainly comes from God, who is
the author of good and the father of light. Now in divine operations even the smallest
beginnings lead unstoppably to their end. It was said of spiritual things that 'The
kingdom of God cometh not with observation' [Luke 17:20], and it is the same with all
the greater works of divine providence: everything glides on smoothly and noiselessly,
and the work is well under way before men are aware that it has begun. And don't
forget Daniel's prophecy concerning the last ages of the world: 'Many shall run to and
fro, and knowledge shall be increased' [Daniel 12:4], clearly indicating that the
thorough exploration of the whole world is fated to coincide with the advancement of
the sciences. (By 'fated' I mean 'destined by ·God's· providence'. I would add that
there have been so many distant voyages that 'the thorough exploration of the whole
world' seems to have reached completion or to be well on the way to it.)
94. Next topic: the best of all reasons for having hope, namely the errors of the past,
the wrong roads so far taken. In the course of censuring a poorly run government the
critic said something excellent:
The worst things in the past ought to be regarded as the best for the future. For if
you had conducted yourself perfectly yet still ended up in your present ·miserable·
condition, you would have not even a hope of improvement. But as things stand,
with your misfortunes being due not to the circumstances but to your own errors,
you can hope that by abandoning or correcting these errors you can make a great
change for the better.
Similarly, if throughout many years men had gone the right way about discovering
and cultivating the sciences, and the sciences had still been in the state they are now
actually in, it would have been absurdly bold to think that further progress was
possible. But if the wrong road has been taken, and men have worked on things that
weren't worthwhile, it follows that the troubles have arisen not from •circumstances
that weren't in our power but from •the human intellect—and the use and application
of that can be remedied. So it will be really useful to expound these errors; because
every harm they have done in the past gives us reason to hope to do better in the
future. I have already said a little about these errors, but I think I should set them out
here in plain and simple words.
95. Those who have been engaged in the sciences divide into experimenters and
theorists. The experimenters, like •ants, merely collect and use ·particular facts·; the
theorists, like •spiders, make webs out of themselves. But the •bee takes a middle
course: it gathers its material from the ﬂowers of the garden and the ﬁeld, but uses its
own powers to transform and absorb this material. A true worker at philosophy is like
that:

he doesn't rely solely or chieﬂy on the powers of the mind ·like a theorist =
spider·, and
he doesn't take the material that he gathers from natural history and physical
experiments and store it up in his memory just as he ﬁnds it ·like an
experimenter = ant·. Instead,
he stores the material in his intellect, altered and brought under control.
So there is much to hope for from a closer and purer collaboration between these two
strands in science, experimental and theoretical—a collaboration that has never
occurred before now.
96. We have never yet had a natural philosophy that was pure. What we have had has
always been tainted and spoiled: in Aristotle's school by logic; in Plato's by natural
theology; in the second school of Platonists (Proclus and others) by mathematics,
which ought only to set natural philosophy's limits, not generate it or give it birth.
From a pure and unmixed natural philosophy we can hope for better things ·than can
be expected from any of those impure systems·.
97. No-one has yet been found who was suﬃciently ﬁrm of mind and purpose to
decide on and to carry out this programme:
Clean right out all theories and common notions, and apply the intellect—thus
scrubbed clean and evenly balanced—to a fresh examination of particulars.
[[By particulars, Bacon likely means something close to speciﬁc individual data points
and observations.]]
For want of this, the human knowledge that we have is a mish-mash, composed of
•childish notions that we took in along with our mothers' milk, together with •·the
results of· much credulity and many stray happenings. So if someone of mature years,
with functioning senses and a well-purged mind, makes a fresh start on examining
experience and particular events, better things may be hoped for from him. In this
respect, I pledge myself to have good fortune like that of Alexander the Great. Don't
accuse me of vanity until you have heard me out, because what I am getting at—
taken as a whole—goes against vanity. Aeschines said of Alexander and his deeds:
'Assuredly we don't live the life of mortal men. What we were born for was that in
after ages wonders might be told of us', as though Alexander's deeds seemed to him
miraculous. But ·what I am saying about myself is not like that, but rather like this·: in
the next age Livy took a better and a deeper view of the matter, saying of Alexander
that 'all he did was to have the courage to neglect sources of fear that were
negligible'. I think that a similar judgment may be passed on me in future ages: that I
did no great things, but simply cut down to size things that had been regarded as
great. . . .
98. We can't do without experience; but so far we haven't had any foundations for
experience, or only very weak ones. No-one has searched out and stored up a great
mass of particular events that is adequate
in number,
in kind,
in certainty, or
in any other way
to inform the intellect. On the contrary, learned men— relaxed and idle—have
accepted, as having the weight of legitimate evidence for constructing or conﬁrming

their philosophy, bits of hearsay and rumours about experience. Think of a kingdom or
state that manages its aﬀairs on the basis not of •letters and reports from
ambassadors and trustworthy messengers but of •street-gossip and the gutter! Well,
the way philosophy has managed its relations with experience has been exactly like
that.
Nothing examined in enough careful detail,
nothing veriﬁed,
nothing counted,
nothing weighed,
nothing measured
is to be found in natural history. And observations that are loose and unsystematic
lead to ideas that are deceptive and treacherous. Perhaps you think that this is a
strange thing to say. You may want to comment:
Your complaint is unfair. Aristotle—a great man, supported by the wealth of a
great king—composed an accurate natural history of animals; and others, with
greater diligence though making less fuss about it, made many additions; while
yet others compiled rich histories and descriptions of metals, plants, and fossils.
If so, it seems that you haven't properly grasped what I am saying here. For the
rationale of a •natural history that is composed for its own sake is not like the
rationale of a •natural history that is collected to supply the intellect with the
concepts it needs for building up philosophy. They diﬀer in many ways, but especially
in this: the former attends only to the variety of natural species ·as they are found in
nature·, not to ·deliberately constructed· experiments in the mechanical arts. In the
business of life, the best way to discover a man's character, the secrets of how his
mind works, is to see how he handles trouble. In just the same way, nature's secrets
come to light better when she is artiﬁcially shaken up than when she goes her own
way. So we can hope for good things from natural philosophy when natural history—
which is its ground-ﬂoor and foundation—is better organized. Then, but not until then!
99. Furthermore, even when there are plenty of mechanical experiments, there's a
great scarcity of ones that do much to enlarge the mind's stock of concepts. The
experimental technician isn't concerned with discovering the truth, and isn't willing to
raise his mind or stretch out his hand for anything that doesn't bear on his ·practical·
project. There will be grounds for hope of scientiﬁc advances when ·and only when·
men assemble a good number of natural-history experiments that •are in themselves
of no ·practical· use but simply •serve to discover causes and axioms. I call these
'experiments of light', to distinguish them from the ·practically useful but theoretically
sterile· ones that I call 'experiments of fruit' [here 'fruit' = 'practical results']. Now,
experiments of this kind have one admirable property: they never miss or fail! Their
aim is not to •produce some particular eﬀect but only to •discover the natural cause
of something; and such an experiment succeeds equally well however it turns out, for
either way it settles the question.
100. Many more experiments should be devised and carried out, and ones of an
utterly diﬀerent kind from any we have had up to now. But that is not all. There should
also be introduced an entirely diﬀerent method, order, and procedure for carrying
through a programme of experiments. To repeat something I have already said [82]:
when experimentation wanders around of its own accord, it merely gropes in the dark
and confuses men rather than instructing them. But when there is a ﬁrmly regulated,
uninterrupted series of experiments, there is hope for advances in knowledge.

101. Even after we have acquired and have ready at hand a store of natural history
and experimental results such as is required for the work of the intellect, or of
philosophy, still that is not enough. The intellect is far from being able to retain all this
material in memory and recall it at will, any more than a man could keep a diary all in
his head. Yet until now there has been more thinking than writing about discovery
procedures—experimentation hasn't yet become literate! But a discovery isn't worth
much if it isn't ·planned and reported· in writing; and when this becomes the standard
practice, better things can be hoped for from experimental procedures that have at
last been made literate.
102. The particulars ·that have to be studied· are very numerous, and are like an
army that is dispersed across a wide terrain, threatening to scatter and bewilder the
intellect ·that tries to engage with them·. There's not much to be hoped for from
intellectual skirmishing ·with these particulars·, dashing here and there among them
in a disorderly way. What is needed is ﬁrst •to get the relevant particulars drawn up
and arranged, doing this by means of tables of discovery that are well selected, well
arranged, and fresh (as though living); and •to put the mind to work on the prepared
and arranged helps that these tables provide.
[[By axiom, Bacon means something akin to hypothesis or model.]]
103. But after this store of particulars has been laid before our eyes in an orderly way,
we shouldn't pass straight on to the investigation and discovery of new particulars or
new discoveries; or anyway if we do do that we oughtn't to stop there. I don't deny
that when all the experiments of all the arts have been collected and ordered and
brought within the knowledge and judgment of one man, new useful things may be
discovered through taking the experimental results of one art and re-applying them to
a diﬀerent art (using the approach to experiments that I have called 'literate',
·meaning that the results are properly recorded in writing·). But nothing much can be
hoped for from that procedure. Much more promising is this: from those particular
results derive axioms in a methodical manner, then let the light of the axioms point
the way to new particulars. For our road does not lie on a level, but goes up and down
—up to axioms, then down again to scientiﬁc practice.
[[For a modern plain English description of Bacon's method see: 1, 2, 3.
A concrete example of what Bacon is discussing might be as follows:
Particular: you observe that both parents of sparrows care for their young*.
Highly-General Axiom/Hypothesis: both sexes of all bird species care for the
young;
Medium-General Hypothesis: both of sexes small birds care for their young;
Narrow Axiom/Hypotheses: Some of both sexes of sparrows living in South
England care for their young.
Aristotle might start with a fews observations or a folk belief that some birds of both
sexes care for their young and then formulate a universal truth: For all X such that X is
a bird, it cares for its young. By syllogism, Aristotle will derive new particular cases:
Robins are are kind of bird therefore box sexes of Robins care for their young. This is
syllogistic demonstration.

Bacon states that the Aristotelian approach is utterly invalid and instead one musts
only generalize modestly from observations, using each expansion of the
generalization to seek out further evidence which will either conﬁrm or deny further
expansion.
*This is a ﬁctitious example.]]
104. But the intellect mustn't be allowed •to jump—to ﬂy—from particulars a long
way up to axioms that are of almost the highest generality (such as the so-called 'ﬁrst
principles' of arts and of things) and then on the basis of them (taken as unshakable
truths) •to 'prove' and thus secure middle axioms. That has been the practice up to
now, because the intellect has a natural impetus to do that and has for many years
been trained and habituated in doing it by the use of syllogistic demonstration. Our
only hope for good results in the sciences is for us to proceed thus: using a valid
ladder, we move up gradually—not in leaps and bounds—from particulars to lower
axioms, then to middle axioms, then up and up until at last we reach the most general
axioms. ·The two ends of this ladder are relatively unimportant· because the lowest
axioms are not much diﬀerent from ·reports on· bare experience, while the highest
and most general ones—or anyway the ones that we have now—are notional and
abstract and without solid content. It's the middle axioms that are true and solid and
alive; they are the ones on which the aﬀairs and fortunes of men depend. Above them
are the most general axioms, ·which also have value, but· I am talking not about
abstract axioms but rather about ones of which the middle axioms are limitations ·and
which thus get content from the middle axioms·. So the human intellect should be
•supplied not with wings but rather •weighed down with lead, to keep it from leaping
and ﬂying. This hasn't ever been done; when it is done we'll be entitled to better
hopes of the sciences.
105. For establishing axioms we have to devise a diﬀerent form of induction from any
that has been use up to now, and it should be used for proving and discovering not
only so-called 'ﬁrst principles' but also the lesser middle axioms— indeed all axioms.
The induction that proceeds by simply listing positive instances is a childish aﬀair; its
conclusions are precarious and exposed to peril from a contradictory instance; and it
generally reaches its conclusions on the basis of too few facts—merely the ones that
happen to be easily available. A form of induction that will be useful for discovery and
demonstration in the sciences and the arts will have •to separate out a nature
through appropriate rejections and exclusions, and then, after a suﬃcient number of
negatives, •to reach a conclusion on the aﬃrmative instances. [Bacon will start to
explain this in 2-15.] No-one has ever done this, or even tried to, except for Plato who
does indeed make some use of this form of induction for the purpose of discussing
deﬁnitions and ideas. But for this kind of induction (or demonstration) to be properly
equipped for its work, many things have to be done that until now no mortal has given
a thought to; so that much more work will have to be spent on this than has ever been
spent on the syllogism. And this induction should be used not only in the discovery of
axioms but also in drawing boundaries around notions. It is in this induction that our
chief hope lies.
[[Here Bacon again mentions the importance of Looking Into the Dark .]]
106. When establishing an axiom by this kind of induction, we must carefully note
whether the axiom is shaped so as to ﬁt only the particulars from which it is derived,
rather than being larger and wider. And if it is larger and wider, we must see whether
its greater scope is conﬁrmed and justiﬁed by new particulars that it leads us to. Such
a justiﬁed increase of scope saves us from being stuck with things that are already

known (but if it isn't justiﬁed then we are over-stretching, loosely grasping at shadows
and abstract forms rather than at solid things in the world of matter). When we do
things in this way we shall at last have justiﬁed hope.
107. At this point I should remind you of what I said earlier [80] about extending the
range of natural philosophy so that the particular sciences can be grounded in it, and
the branches of knowledge don't get lopped oﬀ from the trunk. For without that there
will be little hope of progress.
The next post in the sequence, Book 1: 108-130 (Reasons for Hope & Objection
Preemption), will be posted Thursday, October 17 at latest by 4:00pm PDT.

Reasons for Hope & Objection
Preemption (Novum Organum Book 1:
108-130)
This is the eighth post in the Novum Organum sequence. For context, see
the sequence introduction.
We have used Francis Bacon's Novum Organum in the version presented at
www.earlymoderntexts.com. Translated by and copyright to Jonathan Bennett.
Prepared for LessWrong by Ruby.
Ruby's Reading Guide
Novum Organum is organized as two books each containing numbered
"aphorisms." These vary in length from three lines to sixteen pages. Bracketed
titles of posts in this sequence, e.g. Idols of the Mind Pt. 1, are my own and do not
appear in the original.
While the translator, Bennett, encloses his editorial remarks in a single pair of
[brackets], I have enclosed mine in a [[double pair of brackets]].
Bennett's Reading Guide
[Brackets] enclose editorial explanations. Small ·dots· enclose material that has
been added, but can be read as though it were part of the original text. Occasional
•bullets, and also indenting of passages that are not quotations, are meant as aids
to grasping the structure of a sentence or a thought. Every four-point ellipsis . . . .
indicates the omission of a brief passage that seems to present more diﬃculty
than it is worth. Longer omissions are reported between brackets in normal-sized
type.

Aphorism Concerning the
Interpretation of Nature: Book 1: 108-
130
by Francis Bacon
[[Bacon continues his listing of reasons we should believe much greater scientiﬁc
progress is possible.]]
108. That's all I have to say about getting rid of despair and creating hope by
banishing or ﬁxing past errors. Now, what other ways are there of creating hope?
Here's a thought that occurs at once: Many useful discoveries have been made
accidentally by men who weren't looking for them but were busy about other things;
so no-one can doubt that if men seek for something and are busy about it, proceeding
in an orderly and not a slapdash way, they will discover far more. Of course it can
happen occasionally that someone accidentally stumbles on a result that he wouldn't
have found if he had searched hard for it, but on the whole the opposite is the case—
·things are discovered by methodical searching that couldn't have been found by
accident·. So, far better things, and more of them, and at shorter intervals, are to be
hoped for from •hard thinking, hard focussed work and concentration than from
•·lucky· accidents, undisciplined whims and the like, which until now have been the
main source of discoveries.
109. Here is another ground for hope: Discoveries have sometimes been made that
would have been almost unthinkable in advance, and would have been written oﬀ as
impossible. Men think about the new in terms of the old: to questions about what the
•future holds they bring an imagination indoctrinated and coloured by the •past. This
is a terrible way of forming opinions, because streams fed by nature's springs don't
run along familiar channels.
Suppose that before gunpowder was invented someone described it in terms of its
eﬀects—'There is a new invention by means of which the strongest towers and walls
can be demolished from a long way oﬀ'. That would no doubt have set men thinking
about how to increase the power of catapults and wheeled ramming devices. The
notion of a ﬁery blast suddenly and forcefully expanding and exploding would hardly
have entered into any man's mind or imagination, because nothing closely analogous
to that had ever been seen. Well, except perhaps in earthquakes and lightning, but
they wouldn't have been seen as relevant because they are mighty works of nature
which men couldn't imitate.
Or suppose that before the discovery of silk someone had said: 'They've discovered
new a kind of thread for use in clothing and furniture-coverings; it is ﬁner, softer, more
beautiful and stronger than linen or wool.' Men would have begun to think of some
silky kind of plant or of very ﬁne hair of some animal or of the feathers and down of
birds; they would not have thought of a web woven by a tiny worm in great quantities
and renewing itself yearly. If anyone had said anything about a worm, he'd have been
laughed at as dreaming of a new kind of cobweb! [Bacon then gives a third example:
the magnet.] Yet these things and others like them lay concealed from men for
centuries, and when they did come to light it wasn't through science or any technical
skill but by accident and coincidence. As I have remarked, they were so utterly

diﬀerent in kind from anything previously known that they couldn't possibly have been
discovered through a preconceived notion of them.
So there are strong grounds for hoping that nature has concealed in its folds many
wonderfully useful •things that aren't related to or parallel with anything that is now
known, and lie right outside our imaginative reach. As the centuries roll on, •they too
will doubtless come to light of their own accord in some roundabout way, as did
gunpowder and the others; but by the method I am discussing they can be presented
and anticipated speedily, suddenly and all at once.
110. Other discoveries prove that this can happen: splendid discoveries are lying at
our feet, and we step over them without seeing them. The discoveries of
gunpowder,
silk,
the magnet,
sugar,
paper,
or the like may seem to depend on certain properties of things of and nature—
·properties that might have been hard to discover·. But there is nothing in printing
that isn't wide open and almost easy. All that was needed was to see that
although it is harder to arrange letter-types than to write by hand, the two
procedures diﬀer in that once the types have been arranged any number of
impressions can be made from them, whereas hand-writing provides only a
single copy,
and to see that
ink can be so thickened so that it does its job but doesn't run, especially when
the type faces upwards and the ink is rolled onto it from above.
It was merely because they didn't notice these ·obvious· facts that men went for so
many ages without this most beautiful invention which is so useful in the spreading of
knowledge.
But the human mind is such a mess when it comes to this business of discoveries that
it ﬁrst •distrusts and then •despises itself:
before the discovery: it is not credible that any such thing can be found,
afterwards: it is incredible that the world should have missed it for so long!
And this very thing entitles us to some hope, namely the hope that there is a great
mass of discoveries still to be made—not just ones that will have to be dug out by
techniques that we don't yet have, but also ones that may come to light through our
transferring, ordering and applying things that we do know already, this being done
with the help of the experimental approach that I call 'literate' [101].
111. Another ground of hope should be mentioned. Let men reﬂect on their inﬁnite
expenditure of intellect, time, and means on things of far less use and value ·than the
discoveries I am talking about·. If even a small part of this were directed to sound and
solid studies, there is no diﬃculty that couldn't be overcome. I mention this ·matter of
the use of resources· because a collection of Natural and Experimental History, as I

envisage it and as it ought to be, is a great—as it were, a royal—work, and I freely
admit that it will involve much labour and expense.
[It will appear in Book 2-11 that the 'collection' Bacon talks of is an orderly written
account of phenomena, experiments and their results, not a physical museum.]
112. In the meantime, don't be put oﬀ by how many particulars there are; rather, let
this give you hope. ·The fact is that you will be in worse trouble if you don't engage
with them·; for the •particular phenomena of nature are a mere handful compared to
the ·great multitudes of· •things that human ingenuity can fabricate if it cuts itself oﬀ
from the clarifying eﬀects of reality. And this road ·through the study of real events·
soon leads to open ground, whereas the other—·the route through invented theories
and thought-experiments·— leads to nothing but endless entanglement. Until now
men haven't lingered long with •experience; they have brushed past it on their way to
the ingenious •theorizings on which they have wasted unthinkable amounts of time.
But if we had someone at hand who could answer our questions of the form 'What are
the facts about this matter?', it wouldn't take many years for us to discover all causes
and complete every science [the Latin literally means 'to discover all causes and
sciences'].
113. Men may take some hope, I think, from my own example (I'm not boasting; just
trying to be useful). If you are discouraged ·about the chances of progress in the
sciences·, look at me!
I am busier with aﬀairs of state than any other man of my time,
I lose a lot of time to ill-health, and
in this ·scientiﬁc· work I am wholly a pioneer, not following in anyone's tracks
and not getting advice from anyone.
And yet, ·despite these three sources of diﬃculty·, I think I have pushed things on a
certain amount by sticking to the true road and submitting my mind to reality. Well,
then, think what might be expected (now that I have pointed out the way) from men
with plenty of free time,
·in good health·, and
working together, on the basis of previous work ·by others·.
Unlike the work of sheerly thinking up hypotheses, proper scientiﬁc work can be done
collaboratively; the best way is for men's eﬀorts (especially in collecting experimental
results) to be exerted separately and then brought together. Men will begin to know
their strength only when they go this way—with one taking charge of one thing and
another of another, instead of all doing all the same things.
114. Lastly, even if the breeze of hope that blows on us from that New Continent
were fainter and less noticeable than it is, still we have to try—unless we prefer to
have minds that are altogether abject! The loss that may come from •not trying is
much greater than what may come from ·trying and· •not succeeding: by •not trying
we throw away the chance of an immense good; by •not succeeding we only incur the
loss of a little human labour. But from what I have said (and from some things that I
haven't said) it seems to me that there is more than enough hope not only •to get a
vigorous man to try but also to make a sober-minded and wise man believe ·that he
will succeed·.
115. That completes what I wanted to say about getting rid of the pessimism that has
been one of the most powerful factors delaying and hindering the progress of the

sciences. I have also ﬁnished with the signs and causes of errors, of sluggishness and
of the prevailing ignorance. ·I've said more about this than you might think·, because
the more subtle causes—the ones that aren't generally noticed or thought about—
come under what I said about the 'idols' of the human mind.
And this should also bring to an end the part of my Great Fresh Start [see note in 31]
that is devoted to rejection, which I have carried out through three refutations:
(1) the refutation of innate human reason left to itself [see Preface];
(2) the refutation of demonstrations [see 44 and 69];
(3) the refutation of the accepted philosophical doctrines [see 60-62].
I refuted these in the ·only· way I could do so, namely through signs and the evidence
of causes. I couldn't engage in any other kind of confutation because I diﬀer from my
opponents both on ﬁrst principles and on rules of demonstration.
So now it is time to proceed to the actual techniques for interpreting nature and to the
rules governing them—except that there is still something that has to be said ﬁrst! In
this ﬁrst book of aphorisms my aim has been to prepare men's minds not just for
•understanding what was to follow but for •accepting it; and now that I have •cleared
up and washed down and levelled the ﬂoor of the mind, I have to •get the mind into a
good attitude towards the things I am laying before it—to look kindly on them, as it
were. ·This has to be worked for·, because anything new will be confronted by
prejudgments ·against it·, not only ones created by old opinions but also ones created
by false ideas about what the new thing is going to be. So I shall try to create sound
and true opinions about what I am going to propose; but this is only a stop-gap
expedient—a kind of security deposit—to serve until I can make the stuﬀ itself
thoroughly known.
116. First, then, don't think that I want to found a new sect in philosophy—like the
ancient Greeks and like some moderns such as Telesio, Patrizzi or Severinus. For that's
not what I am up to; and I really don't think that human welfare depends much on
what abstract opinions anyone has about nature and its workings. No doubt many old
theories of this sort can be revived and many new ones introduced, just as many
theories of the heavens can be supposed that ﬁt the phenomena well enough but
diﬀer from each other; but I'm not working on such useless speculative matters.
My purpose, rather, is to see whether I can't provide humanity's power and greatness
with ﬁrmer foundations and greater scope. I have achieved some results—scattered
through some special subjects—that I think to be far more true and certain and indeed
more fruitful than any that have so far been used (I have collected them in the •ﬁfth
part of my Fresh Start); but I don't yet have a complete theory of everything to
propound. It seems that the time hasn't come for that. I can't hope to live long
enough to complete the •sixth part (which is to present science discovered through
the proper interpretation of nature); but I'll be satisﬁed if in the middle parts I conduct
myself soberly and usefully, sowing for future ages the seeds of a purer truth, and not
shying away from the start of great things. [See note in 31.]
117. Not being the founder of a sect, I am not handing out bribes or promises of
particular works. You may indeed think that because I talk so much about 'works' ·or
'results'· and drag everything over to that, I should produce some myself as a down-
payment. Well, I have already clearly said it many times, and am happy now to say it
again: my project is not to get

works from works or
experiments from experiments (like the •empirics),
but rather to get
causes and axioms from works and experiments,
and then to get
new works and experiments from those causes and axioms (like the •legitimate
interpreters of nature).
[An 'empiric' is someone who is interested in what works but not in why it works;
especially a physician of that sort, as referred to by Locke when he speaks of
'swallowing down opinions as silly people do empirics' pills, without knowing what
they are made of or how they will work'.]
If you look at
my Tables of Discovery that ·will· constitute the fourth part of the Fresh Start,
and
the examples of particulars that I present in the second part, ·i.e. the present
work·, and
my observations on the history that I ·will· sketch in the third part,
you won't need any great intellectual skill to see indications and outlines of many ﬁne
results all through this material; but I openly admit that the natural history that I have
so far acquired, from books and from my own investigations, is too skimpy, and not
veriﬁed with enough accuracy, to serve the purposes of legitimate interpretation.
To anyone who is abler and better prepared ·than I am· for mechanical pursuits, and
who is clever at getting results from experiment, I say: By all means go to work
snipping oﬀ bits from my history and my tables and apply them to getting results—
this could serve as interest until the principal is available. But I am hunting for bigger
game, and I condemn all hasty and premature interruptions for such things as these,
which are (as I often say) like Atalanta's spheres. I don't go dashing oﬀ after golden
apples, like a child; I bet everything on art's winning its race against nature. [On
Atalanta and the race see 70.] I don't scurry around clearing out moss and weeds; I
wait for the harvest when the crop is ripe.
118. When my history and Tables of Discovery are read, it will surely turn out that
some things in the experiments themselves are not quite certain or perhaps even
downright false, which may lead you to think that the foundations and principles on
which my discoveries rest are ·also· false and doubtful. But this doesn't matter, for
such things are bound to happen at ﬁrst. It's like a mere typographical error, which
doesn't much hinder the reader because it is easy to correct as you read. In the same
way, ·my· natural history may contain many experiments that are false, but it won't
take long for them to be easily expunged and rejected through the discovery of
causes and axioms. It is nevertheless true that if big mistakes come thick and fast in a
natural history, they can't possibly be corrected or amended through any stroke of
intelligence or skill. Now, my natural history has been collected and tested with great
diligence, strictness and almost religious care, yet there may be errors of detail tucked
away in it; so what should be said of run-of-the-mill natural history, which is so
careless and easy in comparison with mine? And what of the philosophy and sciences

built on that kind of sand (or rather quicksand)? So no-one should be troubled by what
I have said.
119. My history and experiments will contain many things that are
trivial, familiar and ordinary, many that are
mean and low [see 120], and many that are
extremely subtle, merely speculative, and seemingly useless [see 121].
Such things could lead men to lose interest or to become hostile ·to what I have to
oﬀer. I shall give these one paragraph each·.
Men should bear in mind that until now their activities have consisted only in
explaining unusual events in terms of more usual ones, and they have simply taken
the usual ones for granted, not asking what explains them. So they haven't
investigated the causes of
weight,
rotation of heavenly bodies,
heat,
cold,
light,
hardness,
softness,
rarity,
density,
liquidity,
solidity,
life,
lifelessness,
similarity,
dissimilarity,
organicness,
and the like. They have accepted these as self-evident and obvious, and have devoted
their inquiring and quarrelling energies to less common and familiar things.
But I have to let the most ordinary things into my history, because I know that until we
have properly looked for and found the causes of common things and the causes of
those causes, we can't make judgments about uncommon or remarkable things, let
alone bring anything new to light. Indeed, I don't think that anything holds up
philosophy more than the fact that common and familiar events don't cause men to
stop and think, but are received casually with no inquiry into their causes. A result of
this we need •to pay attention to things that are known and familiar at least as often
as •to get information about unknown things.
120. As for things that are low or even ﬁlthy: as Pliny says, these should be
introduced with an apology, but they should be admitted into natural history just as
the most splendid and costly things should. And that doesn't pollute the natural
history that admits them; the sun enters the sewer as well as the palace, but isn't
polluted by that! I am not building a monument dedicated to human glory or erecting
a pyramid in its honour; what I'm doing is to lay a foundation for a holy temple in the
human intellect—a temple modelled on the world. So I follow that model, because
whatever is worthy of being is worthy of scientiﬁc knowledge, which is the image or
likeness of being; and low things exist just as splendid ones do. And another point:

just as from certain putrid substances such as musk and civet the sweetest odours are
sometimes generated, so also mean and sordid events sometimes give oﬀ excellent
and informative light. That is enough about this; more than enough, because this sort
of squeamishness is downright childish and eﬀeminate.
121. The third objection must be looked into much more carefully. I mean the
objection that many things in my history will strike ordinary folk, and indeed ·non-
ordinary· ones trained in the presently accepted systems, as intricately subtle and
useless. It is especially because of this objection that I have said, and should ·again·
say, that in the initial stages ·of the inquiry· I am aiming at experiments of light, not
experiments of fruit [see 99]. In this, as I have often said [see 70], I am following the
example of the divine creation which on the ﬁrst day produced nothing but light, and
gave that a day to itself without doing any work with matter. To suppose, therefore,
that things like these ·'subtleties' of mine· are useless is the same as supposing that
light is useless because it isn't a thing, isn't solid or material. And well-considered and
well-delimited knowledge of simple natures is like light: it gives entrance to all the
secrets of nature's workshop, and has the power to gather up and draw after it whole
squadrons of works and ﬂoods of the ﬁnest axioms; yet there is hardly anything we
can do with it just in itself. Similarly the •letters of the alphabet taken separately are
useless and meaningless, yet they're the basic materials for the planning and
composition of all discourse. So again the •seeds of things have much latent power,
but nothing comes of it except in their development. And ·light is like scientiﬁc
subtleties in another way, namely·: the scattered rays of light don't do any good
unless they are made to converge.
If you object to speculative subtleties, what will you say about the schoolmen [=
'mediaeval and early modern Aristotelians'], who have wallowed in subtleties? And
their subtleties were squandered on •words (or on popular notions—same thing!)
rather than on •facts or nature; and they were useless the whole way through, unlike
mine, which are indeed useless right now but which promise endless beneﬁts later on.
But this is sure, and you should know it:
All subtlety in disputations and other mental bustling about, if it occurs after the
axioms have been discovered, comes too late and has things backwards. The true
and proper time for subtlety, or anyway the chief time for it, is when pondering
experiments and basing axioms on them.
For that other ·later· subtlety grasps and snatches at [captat] nature but can never
get a grip on [capit] it. . . .
A ﬁnal remark about the lofty dismissal from natural history of everything •common,
everything •low, everything •subtle and as it stands useless: When a haughty
monarch rejected a poor woman's petition as unworthy thing and beneath his dignity,
she said: 'Then leave oﬀ being king.' That may be taken as an oracle. For someone
who won't attend to things like •these because they are too paltry and minute can't
take possession of the kingdom of nature and can't govern it.
122. This may occur to you: 'It is amazing that you have the nerve to push aside all
the sciences and all the authorities at a single blow, doing this single-handed, without
bringing in anything from the ancients to help you in your battle and to guard your
ﬂanks.'
Well, I know that if I had been willing to be so dishonest, I could easily have found
support and honour for my ideas by referring them either •to ancient times before the

time of the Greeks (when natural science may have ﬂourished more ·than it did later·,
though quietly because it hadn't yet been run through the pipes and trumpets of the
Greeks), or even, in part at least, •to some of the Greeks themselves. This would be
like the men of no family who forge genealogical tables that 'show' them to come
from a long line of nobility. But I am relying on the evidentness of ·the truth about·
things, and I'll have nothing to do with any form of ﬁction or fakery. Anyway, it doesn't
matter for the business in hand whether the discoveries being made now •were
known to the ancients long ago and •have alternately ﬂourished and withered through
the centuries because of the accidents of history (just as it doesn't matter to mankind
whether the New World is the island of Atlantis that the ancients knew about or rather
is now discovered for the ﬁrst time). It doesn't matter because discoveries—·even if
they are rediscoveries·—have to be sought [petenda] from the light of nature, not
called back [repetenda] from the shadows of antiquity.
As for the fact that I am ﬁnding fault with everyone and everything: when you think
about it you'll see that that kind of censure is more likely to be right than a partial one
would be—and less damaging, too. For a partial censure would imply that the errors
were not rooted in primary notions, and that there had been some true discoveries;
they could have been used to correct the false results, ·and the people concerned
would have been to blame for not seeing this·. But in fact the errors were
fundamental; they came not so much from false judgment as from not attending to
things that should be attended to; so it's no wonder that men haven't obtained what
they haven't tried for, haven't reached a mark that they never set up, haven't come
to the end of a road that they never started on.
As for the insolence that ·you might think· is inherent in what I am doing: if a man
says that
•his steady hand and good eyes enable him to draw a straighter line or a more
perfect circle than anyone else,
he is certainly •making a comparison of abilities; but if he says only that
•with the help of a ruler or a pair of compasses can draw a straighter line or a
more perfect circle than anyone else can by eye and hand alone,
he isn't •making any great boast. And I'm saying this not only about these ﬁrst
initiating eﬀorts of mine but also about everyone who tackles these matters in the
future. For my route to discovery in the sciences puts men on the same intellectual
level, leaving little to individual excellence, because it does everything by the surest
rules and demonstrations. So I attribute my part in all this, as I have often said, to
good luck rather than to ability—it's a product of time rather than of intelligence. For
there's no doubt that luck has something to do with men's thoughts as well as with
their works and deeds.
123. Someone once said jokingly 'It can't be that we think alike, when one drinks
water and the other drinks wine'; and this nicely ﬁts my present situation. Other men,
in ancient as well as in modern times, have done their science drinking a crude liquor
—like water
(1) ﬂowing spontaneously from a spring or (2) hauled up by wheels from a well,
(1)ﬂowing spontaneously from the intellect or (2) hauled up by logic.
Whereas I drink a toast with a liquor strained from countless grapes, ripe and fully
seasoned ones that have been gathered and picked in clusters, squeezed in the press,

and ﬁnally puriﬁed and clariﬁed in the vat. No wonder I am at odds with the others!
124. This also may occur to you: 'You say it against others, but it can be said against
you, that the goal and mark that you have set up for the sciences is not the true or
the best.' ·The accusation would develop like this·:
Contemplation of the truth is a worthier and loftier thing than thinking about how
big and useful one's practical results will be. Lingering long and anxiously on
•experience and •matter and •the buzz of individual events drags the mind down
to earth, or rather sinks it to an underworld of turmoil and confusion, dragging it
away from a much more heavenly condition—the serene tranquillity of abstract
wisdom.
Now I agree with this line of thought; what the objectors here point to as preferable is
what I too am after, above everything else. For I am laying down in the human
intellect the foundations for a true model of the world—the world as it turns out to be,
not as one's reason would like it to be. This can't be done unless the world is
subjected to a very diligent dissection and anatomical study. As for the stupid models
of the world that men have dreamed up in philosophical systems—like the work of
apes!—they should be utterly scattered to the winds. You need to know what a big
diﬀerence there is (as I said above [23]) between the •idols of the human mind and
the •ideas in the divine mind. The former are merely arbitrary abstractions; the latter
are the creator's little seals on the things he has created, stamped into matter in true
and exquisite lines. In these matters, therefore, truth and usefulness are the very
same thing; and practical applications ·of scientiﬁc results· are of greater value as
pledges of truth than as contributing to the comforts of life.
125. Or you may want to say this: 'You are only doing what the ancients did before
you; so that you are likely, after all this grinding and shoving, to end up with one of
the systems that prevailed in ancient times.' The case for this goes as follows:
The ancients also provided at the outset of their speculations a great store and
abundance of examples and particulars, sorted out and labelled in notebooks;
then out of them they constructed their systems and techniques; and when after
that they had checked out everything they published their results to the world
with a scattering of examples for proof and illustration; but they saw no need to
take the considerable trouble of publishing their working notes and details of
experiments. So they did what builders do: after the house was built they
removed the scaﬀolding and ladders out of sight.
I'm sure they did! But this objection (or misgiving, rather) will be easily answered by
anyone who hasn't completely forgotten what I have said above. The form of inquiry
and discovery that the ancients used—they declared it openly, and it appears on the
very face of their writings—was simply this:
From a few examples and particulars (with some common notions thrown in, and
perhaps some of the most popular accepted opinions). they rushed to the most
general conclusions, the ·would-be· ﬁrst principles of ·their· science. Taking the
truth of these as ﬁxed and immovable, they proceeded to derive from them—
through intermediate propositions— lower-level conclusions out of which they built
their system. Then if any new particulars and examples turned up that didn't ﬁt
their views, they either •subtly moulded them into their system by distinctions or
explanations of their rules, or •coarsely got rid of them by ·tacking· exceptions
·onto their principles·. As for particulars that weren't in conﬂict ·with their views·,

they laboured away through thick and thin to assign them causes in conformity
with their principles.
But this wasn't the experimental natural history that was wanted; far from it. And
anyway dashing oﬀ to the highest generalities ruined everything.
126. will occur to you too: 'By forbidding men to announce principles and take them
as established until they have arrived at the highest generalities in the right way
through intermediate steps, you are inviting them to suspend judgment, bringing this
whole aﬀair down to Acatalepsy.' Not so. What I have in mind and am propounding is
not Acatalepsy [from Greek, = 'the doctrine that nothing can be understood'] but
rather Eucatalepsy [from Greek, = 'the provision of what is needed for things to be
understood']. I don't •disparage the senses, I •serve them; I don't •ignore the
intellect, I •regulate it. And it is surely better that we should
know everything that we need to know, while thinking that our knowledge doesn't
get to the heart of things
than that we should
think our knowledge gets to the heart of things, while we don't yet know anything
we need to know.
127. You may want to ask—just as a query, not an objection—whether I am talking
only about natural philosophy, or whether instead I mean that the other sciences—
logic, ethics and politics—should be conducted in my way. Well, I certainly mean what
I have said to apply to them all. Just as •common logic (which rules things by
syllogisms) extends beyond natural sciences to all sciences, so does •mine (which
proceeds by induction) also embrace everything. I am constructing a history and table
of discovery for
•anger, fear, shame, and the like; for
•matters political; and for
•the mental operations of memory, composition and division, judgment and the
rest,
just as much as for
•heat and cold, light, vegetative growth and the like.
But my method of interpretation ·diﬀers from the common logic in one important
respect; my method·, after the history has been prepared and set in order, concerns
itself not only with •the movements and activities of the mind (as the common logic
does) but also with •the nature of things ·outside the mind·. I guide the mind so that
its way of engaging with any particular thing is always appropriate. That's why my
doctrine of interpretation contains many diﬀerent instructions, ﬁtting the discovery-
method according to the quality and condition of the subject-matter of the inquiry.
128. 'Do you want to pull down and destroy the philosophy, arts and sciences that are
now practised?' There ought to be no question about that. Far from wanting to destroy
them, I am very willing to see them used, developed and honoured. I don't want to get
in the way of their •giving men something to dispute about, •supplying decoration for
discourse, •providing the 'experts' with an income, and •facilitating civil life—acting,
in short, like coins that have value because men agree to give it to them. Let me clear
about this: what I am presenting won't be much use for purposes such as those, since

it can't be brought within reach of the minds of the vulgar except ·indirectly·, through
eﬀects and works. My published writings, especially my Two Books on the
Advancement of Learning, show well enough the sincerity of my declaration of friendly
good will toward the accepted sciences, so I shan't expend more words on that topic
here. Meanwhile I give clear and constant warning that the methods now in use won't
lead to any great progress in the theoretical parts of the sciences, and won't produce
much in the way of applied-science results either.
129. All that remains for me to say are a few words about the excellence of the end in
view. If I had said them earlier they might have seemed like mere prayers; but
perhaps they'll have greater weight now, when hopes have been created and unfair
prejudices removed. I wouldn't have said them even now if I had done the whole job
myself, not calling on anyone else to help with the work, because ·words said in praise
of the object of this exercise· might be taken as a proclamation of my own deserts.
But ·I'm not going it alone·; I do want to energize others and kindle their zeal, so it is
appropriate that I put men in mind of some things, ·even at the risk of seeming to
boast·.
The making of great ·scientiﬁc· discoveries seems to have pride of place among
human actions. That was the attitude of the ancients: they honoured the makers of
discoveries as though they were gods, but didn't go higher than demigods in their
honours for those who did good service in the state (founders of cities and empires,
legislators, saviours of their country from long endured evils, quellers of tyrannies,
and the like). And if you think accurately about the two ·kinds of benefactor· you will
see that the ancients were right about them. Why? (1) Because the beneﬁts of
·scientiﬁc· discoveries can •extend to the whole of mankind, and can •last for all time,
whereas civil beneﬁts •apply only to particular places and •don't last for very long.
(2) Also, improvements in civil matters usually bring violence and confusion with
them, whereas ·scientiﬁc· discoveries bring delight, and confer beneﬁts without
causing harm or sorrow to anyone.
·Scientiﬁc· discoveries are like new creations, imitations of God's works. . . . It seems
to be worth noting that Solomon, the marvel of the world, though mighty in empire
and in gold, in the magniﬁcence of his works, his court, his household, his ﬂeet, and
the lustre of his name, didn't glory in any of these, but pronounced that 'It is the glory
of God to conceal a thing; but the honour of kings is to search out a matter' (Proverbs
25:2).
If you compare how men live in the most civilized provinces of Europe with how they
live in the wildest and most barbarous areas of the American continent, you will think
the diﬀerence is big enough—the diﬀerence in •the condition of the people in
themselves as well as in •what conveniences and comforts they have available to
them—to justify the saying that 'man is a god to man'. And this diﬀerence doesn't
come from the Europeans' having better soil, a better climate, or better physiques,
but from the arts [see note on 'art' here].
Notice the vigour of discoveries, their power to generate consequences. This is
nowhere more obvious than in three discoveries that the ancients didn't know and
whose origins (all quite recent) were obscure and humdrum. I am talking about the
arts of •printing, •gunpowder, and •the nautical compass. These three have changed
the whole aspect and state of things throughout the world—the ﬁrst in literature, the
second in warfare, the third in navigation—bringing about countless changes; so that
there seems to have been no empire, no philosophical system, no star that has

exerted greater power and inﬂuence in human aﬀairs than these mechanical
discoveries.
For my next point, I need to distinguish the three kinds— three levels, as it were—of
human ambition. (1) Some people want to extend their power within their own
country, which is a commonplace and inferior kind of ambition. (2) Some work to
extend the power and dominion of their country in relation to mankind in general; this
is certainly not as base as (1) is, but it is just as much a case of greed. (3) If a man
tries to get mankind's power and control over the universe oﬀ to a fresh start, and to
extend it, hisambition (if it is ambition at all) is certainly more wholesome and noble
·than the other two·. Now—·this being the point I wanted to make·—man's control over
things depends wholly on the arts and sciences, for we can't command nature except
by obeying her.
A further point: it sometimes happens that •one particular discovery is so useful to
mankind that the person who made it and thus put the whole human race into his
debt is regarded as superhuman; so how much higher a thing it is to discover
something through which •everything else can easily be discovered! ·Not that a
discovery's consequences are the main thing about it·. Light is useful in countless
ways, enabling us to walk, practise our arts, read, recognize one another, and yet
something that is ﬁner and lovelier than all those uses of light is seeing light.
Similarly, merely contemplating things as they are, without superstition or imposture,
error or confusion, is in itself worthier than all the practical upshots of discoveries.
Final point: If anyone counts it against the arts and sciences that they can be debased
for purposes of wickedness, luxury, and the like, don't be inﬂuenced by that. The
same can be said of all earthly goods: intelligence, courage, strength, beauty, wealth
—even light! Just let the human race get back the right over nature that God gave to
it, and give it scope; how it is put into practice will be governed by sound reason and
true religion.
130. The time has come for me to present the art of interpreting nature—the art
itself, ·not just remarks about the need for it, its virtues, and so on·. Although I think I
have given true and most useful precepts in it, I don't say that this art is absolutely
necessary, implying that nothing could be done without it. In fact, I think that if
•men had ready at hand a sound history of nature and of experiments, •were
thoroughly practised in it, and •imposed on themselves two rules: (1) set aside
generally accepted opinions and notions, and (2) for a while keep your mind away
from the highest and second-to-highest generalizations,
they would arrive at my form of interpretation sheerly through their own natural
intelligence, with no help from any other rules or techniques. For interpretation is the
true and natural work of the mind when it is freed from blockages. It is true, however,
that it can all be done more readily and securely with help from my precepts.
And I don't say, either, that my art of interpreting nature is complete so that nothing
can be added to it. On the contrary: I am concerned with the mind not only in respect
of its own capacities but also in respect of how it engages with things; so I have to
think that the art of discovery can develop as more discoveries are made.
The next post in the sequence will be posted Thursday, October 24 at latest by
4:00pm PDT.

