
Parables and Prayers
1. Burdens
2. The Parable Of The Talents
3. Nobody Is Perfect, Everything Is Commensurable
4. Answer to Job
5. Universal Love, Said The Cactus Person
6. The Goddess of Everything Else

Burdens
[Content note: Suicide. May be guilt-inducing for people who feel like burdens. All patient characteristics have been heavily obfuscated to
protect conﬁdentiality.]
The DSM lists nine criteria for major depressive disorder, of which the seventh is
"feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt".
There are a lot of dumb diagnostic debates over which criteria are "more important"
or "more fundamental", and for me there's always been something special about
criterion seven. People get depressed over all sorts of things. But when they're
actively suicidal, the people who aren't just gesturing for help but totally set on it,
they always say one thing:
"I feel like I'm a burden".
Depression is in part a disease of distorted cognitions, a failure of rationality. I had one
patient who worked for GM, very smart guy, invented a lot of safety features for cars.
He was probably actively saving a bunch of people's lives every time he checked in at
the oﬃce, and he still felt like he was worthless, a burden, that he was just draining
resources that could better be used for someone else.
In cases like these, you can do a little bit of good just by teaching people the
fundamental lesson of rationality: that you can't always trust your brain. If your
System I is telling you that you're a worthless burden, it could be because you're a
worthless burden, or it could be because System I is broken. If System I is broken, you
need to call in System II to route around the distorted cognition so you can
understand at least on an intellectual level that you're wrong. Once you understand
you're wrong on an intellectual level, you can do what you need to do to make it sink
in on a practical level as well - which starts with not killing yourself.
As sad as it was, Robin Williams' suicide has actually been sort of helpful for me. For
the past few days, I've tried telling these sorts of people that Robin Williams
brightened the lives of millions of people, was a truly great man - and his brain still
kept telling him he didn't deserve to live. So maybe depressed brains are not the most
trustworthy arbiters on these sorts of issues.
This sort of supportive psychotherapy (ie "psychotherapy you make up as you go
along") can sometimes take people some of the way, and then the medications do the
rest.
But sometimes it's harder than this. I don't want to say anyone is ever right about
being a burden, but a lot of the people I see aren't Oscar-winning actors or even
automobile safety engineers. Some people just have no easy outs.
Another patient. 25 year old kid. Had some brain damage a few years ago, now has
cognitive problems and poor emotional control. Can't do a job. Got denied for
disability a few times, in accordance with the ancient bureaucratic tradition. Survives
on a couple of lesser social programs he got approved for plus occasional charity
handouts plus some help from his family. One can trace out an unlikely sequence of
events by which his situation might one day improve, but I won't insult his intelligence
by claiming it's very probable. Now he attempts suicide, says he feels like a burden on
everyone around him. Well, what am I going to say?

It's not always people with some obvious disability. Sometimes it's just alcoholics, or
elderly people, or people without the cognitive skills to get a job in today's economy.
They think that they're taking more from the system than they're putting in, and in
monetary terms they're probably right.
One common therapeutic strategy here is to talk about how much the patient's
parents/friends/girlfriend/pet hamster love them, how heartbroken they would be if
they killed themselves. In the absence of better alternatives, I have used this strategy.
I have used it very grudgingly, and I've always felt dirty afterwards. It always feels like
the worst sort of emotional blackmail. Not helping them want to live, just making
them feel really guilty about dying. "Sure, you're a burden if you live, but if you kill
yourself, that would make you an even bigger burden!" A++ best psychiatrist.
There is something else I've never said, because it's too deeply tied in with my own
politics, and not something I would expect anybody else to understand.
And that is: humans don't owe society anything. We were here ﬁrst.
If my patient, the one with the brain damage, were back in the Environment of
Evolutionary Adaptedness, in a nice tribe with Dunbar's number of people, there
would be no problem.
Maybe his cognitive problems would make him a slightly less proﬁcient hunter than
someone else, but whatever, he could always gather.
Maybe his emotional control problems would give him a little bit of a handicap in tribal
politics, but he wouldn't get arrested for making a scene, he wouldn't get ﬁred for not
sucking up to his boss enough, he wouldn't be forced to live in a tiny apartment with
people he didn't necessarily like who were constantly getting on his nerves. He might
get in a ﬁght and end up with a spear through his gut, but in that case his problems
would be over anyway.
Otherwise he could just hang out and live in a cave and gather roots and berries and
maybe hunt buﬀalo and participate in the appropriate tribal bonding rituals like
everyone else.
But society came and paved over the place where all the roots and berry plants grew
and killed the buﬀalo and dynamited the caves and declared the tribal bonding rituals
Problematic. This increased productivity by about a zillion times, so most people
ended up better oﬀ. The only ones who didn't were the ones who for some reason
couldn't participate in it.
(if you're one of those people who sees red every time someone mentions evolution or
cavemen, imagine him as a dockworker a hundred years ago, or a peasant farmer a
thousand)
Society got where it is by systematically destroying everything that could have
supported him and replacing it with things that required skills he didn't have. Of
course it owes him when he suddenly can't support himself. Think of it as the ultimate
use of eminent domain; a power beyond your control has seized everything in the
world, it had some good economic reasons for doing so, but it at least owes you
compensation!
This is also the basis of my support for a basic income guarantee. Imagine an
employment waterline, gradually rising through higher and higher levels of

competence. In the distant past, maybe you could be pretty dumb, have no emotional
continence at all, and still live a pretty happy life. As the waterline rises, the skills
necessary to support yourself comfortably become higher and higher. Right now most
people in the US who can't get college degrees - which are really hard to get! - are
just barely hanging on, and that is absolutely a new development. Soon enough even
some of the college-educated won't be very useful to the system. And so on, until
everyone is a burden.
(people talk as if the only possible use of information about the determinants of
intelligence is to tell low-IQ people they are bad. Maybe they've never felt the
desperate need to reassure someone "No, it is not your fault that everything is going
wrong for you, everything was rigged against you from the beginning.")
By the time I am a burden - it's possible that I am already, just because I can convince
the system to give me money doesn't mean the system is right to do so, but I expect I
certainly will be one before I die - I would like there to be in place a crystal-clear
understanding that we were here ﬁrst and society doesn't get to make us obsolete
without owing us something in return.
After that, we will have to predicate our self-worth on something other than being able
to "contribute" in the classical sense of the term. Don't get me wrong, I think
contributing something is a valuable goal, and one it's important to enforce to prevent
free-loaders. But it's a valuable goal at the margins, some people are already heading
for the tails, and pretty soon we'll all be stuck there.
I'm not sure what such a post-contribution value system would look like. It might be
based around helping others in less tangible ways, like providing company and
cheerfulness and love. It might be a virtue ethics celebrating people unusually good at
cultivating traits we value. Or it might be a sort of philosophically-informed hedonism
along the lines of Epicurus, where we try to enjoy ourselves in the ways that make us
most human.
And I think my advice to my suicidal patients, if I were able and willing to express all
this to them, would be to stop worrying about being a burden and to start doing all
these things now.

The Parable Of The Talents
[Content note: scrupulosity and self-esteem triggers, IQ, brief discussion of weight and dieting. Not good for growth mindset.]
I.
I sometimes blog about research into IQ and human intelligence. I think most readers
of this blog already know IQ is 50% to 80% heritable, and that it's so important for
intellectual pursuits that eminent scientists in some ﬁelds have average IQs around
150 to 160. Since IQ this high only appears in 1/10,000 people or so, it beggars
coincidence to believe this represents anything but a very strong ﬁlter for IQ (or
something correlated with it) in reaching that level. If you saw a group of dozens of
people who were 7'0 tall on average, you'd assume it was a basketball team or some
other group selected for height, not a bunch of botanists who were all very tall by
coincidence.
A lot of people ﬁnd this pretty depressing. Some worry that taking it seriously might
damage the "growth mindset" people need to fully actualize their potential. This is
important and I want to discuss it eventually, but not now. What I want to discuss now
is people who feel personally depressed. For example, a comment from last week:
I'm sorry to leave self a self absorbed comment, but reading this really upset me
and I just need to get this oﬀ my chest...How is a person supposed to stay sane in
a culture that prizes intelligence above everything else - especially if, as Scott
suggests, Human Intelligence Really Is the Key to the Future - when they
themselves are not particularly intelligent and, apparently, have no potential to
ever become intelligent? Right now I basically feel like pond scum.
I hear these kinds of responses every so often, so I should probably learn to expect
them. I never do. They seem to me precisely backwards. There's a moral gulf here,
and I want to throw stories and intuitions at it until enough of them pile up at the
bottom to make a passable bridge. But ﬁrst, a comparison:
Some people think body weight is biologically/genetically determined. Other people
think it's based purely on willpower - how strictly you diet, how much you can bring
yourself to exercise. These people get into some pretty acrimonious debates.
Overweight people, and especially people who feel unfairly stigmatized for being
overweight, tend to cluster on the biologically determined side. And although not all
believers in complete voluntary control of weight are mean to fat people, the people
who are mean to fat people pretty much all insist that weight is voluntary and easily
changeable.
Although there's a lot of debate over the science here, there seems to be broad
agreement on both sides that the more compassionate, sympathetic, progressive
position, the position promoted by the kind of people who are really worried about
stigma and self-esteem, is that weight is biologically determined.
And the same is true of mental illness. Sometimes I see depressed patients whose
families really don't get it. They say "Sure, my daughter feels down, but she needs to
realize that's no excuse for shirking her responsibilities. She needs to just pick herself
up and get on with her life." On the other hand, most depressed people say that their

depression is more fundamental than that, not a thing that can be overcome by
willpower, certainly not a thing you can just 'shake oﬀ'.
Once again, the compassionate/sympathetic/progressive side of the debate is that
depression is something like biological, and cannot easily be overcome with willpower
and hard work.
One more example of this pattern. There are frequent political debates in which
conservatives (or straw conservatives) argue that ﬁnancial success is the result of
hard work, so poor people are just too lazy to get out of poverty. Then a liberal (or
straw liberal) protests that hard work has nothing to do with it, success is determined
by accidents of birth like who your parents are and what your skin color is et cetera,
so the poor are blameless in their own predicament.
I'm oversimplifying things, but again the compassionate/sympathetic/progressive side
of the debate - and the side endorsed by many of the poor themselves - is supposed
to be that success is due to accidents of birth, and the less compassionate side is that
success depends on hard work and perseverance and grit and willpower.
The obvious pattern is that attributing outcomes to things like genes, biology, and
accidents of birth is kind and sympathetic. Attributing them to who works harder and
who's "really trying" can stigmatize people who end up with bad outcomes and is
generally viewed as Not A Nice Thing To Do.
And the weird thing, the thing I've never understood, is that intellectual achievement
is the one domain that breaks this pattern.
Here it's would-be hard-headed conservatives arguing that intellectual greatness
comes from genetics and the accidents of birth and demanding we "accept" this
"unpleasant truth".
And it's would-be compassionate progressives who are insisting that no, it depends on
who works harder, claiming anybody can be brilliant if they really try, warning us not
to "stigmatize" the less intelligent as "genetically inferior".
I can come up with a few explanations for the sudden switch, but none of them are
very principled and none of them, to me, seem to break the fundamental symmetry of
the situation. I choose to maintain consistency by preserving the belief that
overweight people, depressed people, and poor people aren't fully to blame for their
situation - and neither are unintelligent people. It's accidents of birth all the way
down. Intelligence is mostly genetic and determined at birth - and we've already
determined in every other sphere that "mostly genetic and determined at birth"
means you don't have to feel bad if you got the short end of the stick.
Consider for a moment Srinivasa Ramanujan, one of the greatest mathematicians of
all time. He grew up in poverty in a one-room house in small-town India. He taught
himself mathematics by borrowing books from local college students and working
through the problems on his own until he reached the end of the solveable ones and
had nowhere else to go but inventing ways to solve the unsolveable ones.
There are a lot of poor people in the United States today whose life circumstances
prevented their parents from reading books to them as a child, prevented them from
getting into the best schools, prevented them from attending college, et cetera. And
pretty much all of those people still got more educational opportunities than
Ramanujan did.

And from there we can go in one of two directions. First, we can say that a lot of
intelligence is innate, that Ramanujan was a genius, and that we mortals cannot be
expected to replicate his accomplishments.
Or second, we can say those poor people are just not trying hard enough.
Take "innate ability" out of the picture, and if you meet a poor person on the street
begging for food, saying he never had a chance, your reply must be "Well, if you'd just
borrowed a couple of math textbooks from the local library at age 12, you would have
been a Fields Medalist by now. I hear that pays pretty well."
The best reason not to say that is that we view Ramanujan as intellectually gifted. But
the very phrase tells us where we should classify that belief. Ramanujan's genius is a
"gift" in much the same way your parents giving you a trust fund on your eighteenth
birthday is a "gift", and it should be weighted accordingly in the moral calculus.
II.
I shouldn't pretend I'm worried about this for the sake of the poor. I'm worried for me.
My last IQ-ish test was my SATs in high school. I got a perfect score in Verbal, and a
good-but-not-great score in Math.
And in high school English, I got A++s in all my classes, Principal's Gold Medals,
100%s on tests, ﬁrst prize in various state-wide essay contests, etc. In Math, I just
barely by the skin of my teeth scraped together a pass in Calculus with a C-.
Every time I won some kind of prize in English my parents would praise me and say I
was good and should feel good. My teachers would hold me up as an example and say
other kids should try to be more like me. Meanwhile, when I would bring home a
report card with a C- in math, my parents would have concerned faces and tell me
they were disappointed and I wasn't living up to my potential and I needed to work
harder et cetera.
And I don't know which part bothered me more.
Every time I was held up as an example in English class, I wanted to crawl under a
rock and die. I didn't do it! I didn't study at all, half the time I did the homework in the
car on the way to school, those essays for the statewide competition were thrown
together on a lark without a trace of real eﬀort. To praise me for any of it seemed and
still seems utterly unjust.
On the other hand, to this day I believe I deserve a fricking statue for getting a C- in
Calculus I. It should be in the center of the schoolyard, and have a plaque saying
something like "Scott Alexander, who by making a herculean eﬀort managed to pass
Calculus I, even though they kept throwing random things after the little curly S sign
and pretending it made sense."
And without some notion of innate ability, I don't know what to do with this
experience. I don't want to have to accept the blame for being a lazy person who just
didn't try hard enough in Math. But I really don't want to have to accept the credit for
being a virtuous and studious English student who worked harder than his peers. I
know there were people who worked harder than I did in English, who poured their
heart and soul into that course - and who still got Cs and Ds. To deny innate ability is

to devalue their eﬀorts and sacriﬁce, while simultaneously giving me credit I don't
deserve.
Meanwhile, there were some students who did better than I did in Math with
seemingly zero eﬀort. I didn't begrudge those students. But if they'd started trying to
say they had exactly the same level of innate ability as I did, and the only diﬀerence
was they were trying while I was slacking oﬀ, then I sure as hell would have
begrudged them. Especially if I knew they were lazing around on the beach while I
was poring over a textbook.
I tend to think of social norms as contracts bargained between diﬀerent groups. In the
case of attitudes towards intelligence, those two groups are smart people and dumb
people. Since I was both at once, I got to make the bargain with myself, which
simpliﬁed the bargaining process immensely. The deal I came up with was that I
wasn't going to beat myself up over the areas I was bad at, but I also didn't get to
become too cocky about the areas I was good at. It was all genetic luck of the draw
either way. In the meantime, I would try to press as hard as I could to exploit my
strengths and cover up my deﬁciencies. So far I've found this to be a really healthy
way of treating myself, and it's the way I try to treat others as well.
III.
The theme continues to be "Scott Relives His Childhood Inadequacies". So:
When I was 6 and my brother was 4, our mom decided that as an Overachieving
Jewish Mother she was contractually obligated to make both of us learn to play piano.
She enrolled me in a Yamaha introductory piano class, and my younger brother in a
Yamaha 'cute little kids bang on the keyboard' class.
A little while later, I noticed that my brother was now with me in my Introductory Piano
class.
A little while later, I noticed that my brother was now by far the best student in my
Introductory Piano Class, even though he had just started and was two or three years
younger than anyone else there.
A little while later, Yamaha USA ﬂew him to Japan to show him oﬀ before the Yamaha
corporate honchos there.
Well, one thing led to another, and right now if you Google my brother's name you get
a bunch of articles like this one:
The evidence that Jeremy [Alexander] is among the top jazz pianists of his
generation is quickly becoming overwhelming: at age 26, Alexander is the winner
of the Nottingham International Jazz Piano Competition, a second-place ﬁnisher in
the Montreux Jazz Festival Solo Piano Competition, a two-time ﬁnalist for the
American Pianist Association's Cole Porter Fellowship, and a two-time second-
place ﬁnisher at the Phillips Jazz Competition. Alexander, who was recently named
a Professor of Piano at Western Michigan University's School of Music, made a
sold-out solo debut at Carnegie Hall in 2012, performing Debussy's Etudes in the
ﬁrst half and jazz improvisations in the second half.
Meanwhile, I was always a mediocre student at Yamaha. When the time came to try
an instrument in elementary school, I went with the violin to see if maybe I'd ﬁnd it
more to my tastes than the piano. I was quickly sorted into the remedial class because

I couldn't ﬁgure out how to make my instrument stop sounding like a wounded cat.
After a year or so of this, I decided to switch to fulﬁlling my music requirement
through a choir, and everyone who'd had to listen to me breathed a sigh of relief.
Every so often I wonder if somewhere deep inside me there is the potential to be
"among the top musicians of my generation." I try to recollect whether my brother
practiced harder than I did. My memories are hazy, but I don't think he practiced
much harder until well after his career as a child prodigy had taken oﬀ. The cycle
seemed to be that every time he practiced, things came ﬂuidly to him and he would
produce beautiful music and everyone would be amazed. And this must have felt
great, and incentivized him to practice more, and that made him even better, so that
the beautiful music came even more ﬂuidly, and the praise became more eﬀusive,
until eventually he chose a full-time career in music and became amazing. Meanwhile,
when I started practicing it always sounded like wounded cats, and I would get very
cautious praise like "Good job, Scott, it sounded like that cat was hurt a little less
badly than usual," and it made me frustrated, and want to practice less, which made
me even worse, until eventually I quit in disgust.
On the other hand, I know people who want to get good at writing, and make a mighty
resolution to write two hundred words a day every day, and then after the ﬁrst week
they ﬁnd it's too annoying and give up. These people think I'm amazing, and why
shouldn't they? I've written a few hundred to a few thousand words pretty much every
day for the past ten years.
But as I've said before, this has taken exactly zero willpower. It's more that I can't stop
even if I want to. Part of that is probably that when I write, I feel really good about
having expressed exactly what it was I meant to say. Lots of people read it, they
comment, they praise me, I feel good, I'm encouraged to keep writing, and it's exactly
the same virtuous cycle as my brother got from his piano practice.
And so I think it would be too easy to say something like "There's no innate
component at all. Your brother practiced piano really hard but almost never writes. You
write all the time, but wimped out of practicing piano. So what do you expect? You
both got what you deserved."
I tried to practice piano as hard as he did. I really tried. But every moment was a
struggle. I could keep it up for a while, and then we'd go on vacation, and there'd be
no piano easily available, and I would be breathing a sigh of relief at having a ready-
made excuse, and he'd be heading oﬀ to look for a piano somewhere to practice on.
Meanwhile, I am writing this post in short breaks between running around hospital
corridors responding to psychiatric emergencies, and there's probably someone very
impressed with that, someone saying "But you had such a great excuse to get out of
your writing practice!"
I dunno. But I don't think of myself as working hard at any of the things I am good at,
in the sense of "exerting vast willpower to force myself kicking and screaming to do
them". It's possible I do work hard, and that an outside observer would accuse me of
eliding how hard I work, but it's not a conscious elision and I don't feel that way from
the inside.
Ramanujan worked very hard at math. But I don't think he thought of it as work. He
obtained a scholarship to the local college, but dropped out almost immediately
because he couldn't make himself study any subject other than math. Then he got
accepted to another college, and dropped out again because they made him study

non-mathematical subjects and he failed a physiology class. Then he nearly starved to
death because he had no money and no scholarship. To me, this doesn't sound like a
person who just happens to be very hard-working; if he had the ability to study other
subjects he would have, for no reason other than that it would have allowed him to
stay in college so he could keep studying math. It seems to me that in some sense
Ramanujan was incapable of putting hard work into non-math subjects.
I really wanted to learn math and failed, but I did graduate with honors from medical
school. Ramanujan really wanted to learn physiology and failed, but he did become
one of history's great mathematicians. So which one of us was the hard worker?
People used to ask me for writing advice. And I, in all earnestness, would say "Just
transcribe your thoughts onto paper exactly like they sound in your head." It turns out
that doesn't work for other people. Maybe it doesn't work for me either, and it just
feels like it does.
But you know what? When asked about one of his discoveries, a method of simplifying
a very diﬃcult problem to a continued fraction, Ramanujan described his thought
process as: "It is simple. The minute I heard the problem, I knew that the answer was
a continued fraction. 'Which continued fraction?' I asked myself. Then the answer
came to my mind".
And again, maybe that's just how it feels to him, and the real answer is "study math
so hard that you ﬂunk out of college twice, and eventually you develop so much
intuition that you can solve problems without thinking about them."
(or maybe the real answer is "have dreams where obscure Hindu gods appear to you
as drops of blood and reveal mathematical formulae". Ramanujan was weird).
But I still feel like there's something going on here where the solution to me being bad
at math and piano isn't just "sweat blood and push through your brain's aversion to
these subjects until you make it stick". When I read biographies of Ramanujan and
other famous mathematicians, there's no sense that they ever had to do that with
math. When I talk to my brother, I never get a sense that he had to do that with piano.
And if I am good enough at writing to qualify to have an opinion on being good at
things, then I don't feel like I ever went through that process myself.
So this too is part of my deal with myself. I'll try to do my best at things, but if there's
something I really hate, something where I have to go uphill every step of the way,
then it's okay to admit mediocrity. I won't beat myself up for not forcing myself kicking
and screaming to practice piano. And in return I won't become too cocky about
practicing writing a lot. It's probably some kind of luck of the draw either way.
IV.
I said before that this wasn't just about poor people, it was about me being selﬁshly
worried for my own sake. I think I might have given the mistaken impression that I
merely need to justify to myself why I can't get an A in math or play the piano. But it's
much worse than that.
The rationalist community tends to get a lot of high-scrupulosity people, people who
tend to beat themselves up for not doing more than they are. It's why I push giving
10% to charity, not as some kind of amazing stretch goal that we need to guilt people
into doing, but as a crutch, a sort of "don't worry, you're still okay if you only give ten
percent". It's why there's so much emphasis on "heroic responsibility" and how you,

yes you, have to solve all the world's problems personally. It's why I see red when
anyone accuses us of entitlement, since it goes about as well as calling an anorexic
person fat.
And we really aren't doing ourselves any favors. For example, Nick Bostrom writes:
Searching for a cure for aging is not just a nice thing that we should perhaps one
day get around to. It is an urgent, screaming moral imperative. The sooner we
start a focused research program, the sooner we will get results. It matters if we
get the cure in 25 years rather than in 24 years: a population greater than that of
Canada would die as a result.
If that bothers you, you deﬁnitely shouldn't read Astronomical Waste.
Yet here I am, not doing anti-aging research. Why not?
Because I tried doing biology research a few times and it was really hard and made
me miserable. You know how in every science class, when the teacher says "Okay,
pour the white chemical into the grey chemical, and notice how it turns green and
begins to bubble," there's always one student who pours the white chemical into the
grey chemical, and it just forms a greyish-white mixture and sits there? That was me. I
hated it, I didn't have the dexterity or the precision of mind to do it well, and when I
ﬁnally ﬁnished my required experimental science classes I was happy never to think
about it again. Even the abstract intellectual part of it - the one where you go through
data about genes and ligands and receptors in supercentenarians and shake it until
data comes out - requires exactly the kind of math skills that I don't have.
Insofar as this is a matter of innate aptitude - some people are cut out for biology
research and I'm not one of them - all is well, and my decision to get a job I'm good at
instead is entirely justiﬁed.
But insofar as there's no such thing as innate aptitude, just hard work and grit - then
by not being gritty enough, I'm a monster who's complicit in the death of a population
greater than that of Canada.
Insofar as there's no such thing as innate aptitude, I have no excuse for not being
Aubrey de Grey. Or if Aubrey de Grey doesn't impress you much, Norman Borlaug. Or
if you don't know who either of those two people are, Elon Musk.
I once heard a friend, upon his ﬁrst use of modaﬁnil, wonder aloud if the way they felt
on that stimulant was the way Elon Musk felt all the time. That tied a lot of things
together for me, gave me an intuitive understanding of what it might "feel like from
the inside" to be Elon Musk. And it gave me a good tool to discuss biological variation
with. Most of us agree that people on stimulants can perform in ways it's diﬃcult for
people oﬀ stimulants to match. Most of us agree that there's nothing magical about
stimulants, just changes to the levels of dopamine, histamine, norepinephrine et
cetera in the brain. And most of us agree there's a lot of natural variation in these
chemicals anyone. So "me on stimulants is that guy's normal" seems like a good way
of cutting through some of the philosophical diﬃculties around this issue.
...which is all kind of a big tangent. The point I want to make is that for me, what's at
stake in talking about natural variations in ability isn't just whether I have to feel like a
failure for not getting an A in high school calculus, or not being as good at music as
my brother. It's whether I'm a failure for not being Elon Musk. Speciﬁcally, it's whether

I can say "No, I'm really not cut out to be Elon Musk" and go do something else I'm
better at without worrying that I'm killing everyone in Canada.
V.
The proverb says: "Everyone has somebody better oﬀ than they are and somebody
worse oﬀ than they are, with two exceptions." When we accept that we're all in the
"not Elon Musk" boat together (with one exception) a lot of the status games around
innate ability start to seem less important.
Every so often an overly kind commenter here praises my intelligence and says they
feel intellectually inadequate compared to me, that they wish they could be at my
level. But at my level, I spend my time feeling intellectually inadequate compared to
Scott Aaronson. Scott Aaronson describes feeling "in awe" of Terence Tao and
frequently struggling to understand him. Terence Tao - well, I don't know if he's
religious, but maybe he feels intellectually inadequate compared to God. And God
feels intellectually inadequate compared to Johann von Neumann.
So there's not much point in me feeling inadequate compared to my brother, because
even if I was as good at music as my brother, I'd probably just feel inadequate for not
being Mozart.
And asking "Well what if you just worked harder?" can elide small distinctions, but not
bigger ones. If my only goal is short-term preservation of my self-esteem, I can
imagine that if only things had gone a little diﬀerently I could have practiced more and
ended up as talented as my brother. It's a lot harder for me to imagine the course of
events where I do something diﬀerent and become Mozart. Only one in a billion
people reach a Mozart level of achievement; why would it be me?
If I loved music for its own sake and wanted to be a talented musician so I could
express the melodies dancing within my heart, then none of this matters. But insofar
as I want to be good at music because I feel bad that other people are better than me
at music, that's a road without an end.
This is also how I feel of when some people on this blog complain they feel dumb for
not being as smart as some of the other commenters on this blog.
I happen to have all of your IQ scores in a spreadsheet right here (remember that
survey you took?). Not a single person is below the population average. The ﬁrst
percentile for IQ here - the one such that 1% of respondents are lower and 99% of
respondents are higher - is - corresponds to the 85th percentile of the general
population. So even if you're in the ﬁrst percentile here, you're still pretty high up in
the broader scheme of things.
At that point we're back on the road without end. I am pretty sure we can raise your
IQ as much as you want and you will still feel like pond scum. If we raise it twenty
points, you'll try reading Quantum Computing since Democritus and feel like pond
scum. If we raise it forty, you'll just go to Terence Tao's blog and feel like pond scum
there. Maybe if you were literally the highest-IQ person in the entire world you would
feel good about yourself, but any system where only one person in the world is
allowed to feel good about themselves at a time is a bad system.
People say we should stop talking about ability diﬀerences so that stupid people don't
feel bad. I say that there's more than enough room for everybody to feel bad, smart

and stupid alike, and not talking about it won't help. What will help is fundamentally
uncoupling perception of intelligence from perception of self-worth.
I work with psychiatric patients who tend to have cognitive diﬃculties. Starting out in
the Detroit ghetto doesn't do them any favors, and then they get conditions like
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia that actively lower IQ for poorly understood
neurological reasons.
The standard psychiatric evaluation includes an assessment of cognitive ability; the
one I use is a quick test with three questions. The questions are - "What is 100 minus
7?", "What do an apple and an orange have in common?", and "Remember these
three words for one minute, then repeat them back to me: house, blue, and tulip".
There are a lot of people - and I don't mean ﬂoridly psychotic people who don't know
their own name, I mean ordinary reasonable people just like you and me - who can't
answer these questions. And we know why they can't answer these questions, and it
is pretty darned biological.
And if our answer to "I feel dumb and worthless because my IQ isn't high enough" is
"don't worry, you're not worthless, I'm sure you can be a great scientist if you just try
hard enough", then we are implicitly throwing under the bus all of these people who
are deﬁnitely not going to be great scientists no matter how hard they try. Talking
about trying harder can obfuscate the little diﬀerences, but once we're talking about
the homeless schizophrenic guy from Detroit who can't tell me 100 minus 7 to save
his life, you can't just magic the problem away with a wave of your hand and say "I'm
sure he can be the next Ramanujan if he keeps a positive attitude!" You either need to
condemn him as worthless or else stop fricking tying worth to innate intellectual
ability.
This is getting pretty close to what I was talking about in my post on burdens. When I
get a suicidal patient who thinks they're a burden on society, it's nice to be able to
point out ten important things they've done for society recently and prove them
wrong. But sometimes it's not that easy, and the only thing you can say is "f#@k that
s#!t". Yes, society has organized itself in a way that excludes and impoverishes a
bunch of people who could have been perfectly happy in the state of nature picking
berries and hunting aurochs. It's not your fault, and if they're going to give you
compensation you take it. And we had better make this perfectly clear now, so that
when everything becomes automated and run by robots and we're all behind the
curve, everybody agrees that us continuing to exist is still okay.
Likewise with intellectual ability. When someone feels sad because they can't be a
great scientist, it is nice to be able to point out all of their intellectual strengths and
tell them "Yes you can, if only you put your mind to it!" But this is often not true. At
that point you have to say "f@#k it" and tell them to stop tying their self-worth to
being a great scientist. And we had better establish that now, before transhumanists
succeed in creating superintelligence and we all have to come to terms with our
intellectual inferiority.
VI.
But I think the situation can also be somewhat rosier than that.
Ozy once told me that the law of comparative advantage was one of the most
inspirational things they had ever read. This was suﬃciently strange that I demanded
an explanation.

Ozy said that it proves everyone can contribute. Even if you are worse than everyone
else at everything, you can still participate in global trade and other people will pay
you money. It may not be very much money, but it will be some, and it will be a
measure of how your actions are making other people better oﬀ and they are grateful
for your existence.
(in real life this doesn't work for a couple of reasons, but who cares about real life
when we have a theory?)
After some thought, I was also inspired by this.
I'm never going to be a great mathematician or Elon Musk. But if I pursue my
comparative advantage, which right now is medicine, I can still make money. And if I
feel like it, I can donate it to mathematics research. Or anti-aging research. Or the
same people Elon Musk donates his money to. They will use it to hire smart people
with important talents that I lack, and I will be at least partially responsible for those
people's successes.
If I had an IQ of 70, I think I would still want to pursue my comparative advantage -
even if that was ditch-digging, or whatever, and donate that money to important
causes. It might not be very much money, but it would be some.
Our modern word "talent" comes from the Greek word talenton, a certain amount of
precious metal sometimes used as a denomination of money. The etymology passes
through a parable of Jesus'. A master calls three servants to him and gives the ﬁrst
ﬁve talents, the second two talents, and the third one talent. The ﬁrst two servants
invest the money and double it. The third literally buries it in a hole. The master
comes back later and praises the ﬁrst two servants, but sends the third servant to Hell
(metaphor? what metaphor?).
Various people have come up with various interpretations, but the most popular says
that God gives all of us diﬀerent amounts of resources, and He will judge us based on
how well we use these resources rather than on how many He gave us. It would be
stupid to give your ﬁrst servant ﬁve loads of silver, then your second servant two
loads of silver, then immediately start chewing out the second servant for having less
silver than the ﬁrst one. And if both servants invested their silver wisely, it would be
silly to chew out the second one for ending up with less proﬁt when he started with
less seed capital. The moral seems to be that if you take what God gives you and use
it wisely, you're ﬁne.
The modern word "talent" comes from this parable. It implies "a thing God has given
you which you can invest and give back".
So if I were a ditch-digger, I think I would dig ditches, donate a portion of the small
amount I made, and trust that I had done what I could with the talents I was given.
VII.
The Jews also talk about how God judges you for your gifts. Rabbi Zusya once said
that when he died, he wasn't worried that God would ask him "Why weren't you
Moses?" or "Why weren't you Solomon?" But he did worry that God might ask "Why
weren't you Rabbi Zusya?"
And this is part of why it's important for me to believe in innate ability, and especially
diﬀerences in innate ability. If everything comes down to hard work and positive

attitude, then God has every right to ask me "Why weren't you Srinivasa Ramanujan?"
or "Why weren't you Elon Musk?"
If everyone is legitimately a diﬀerent person with a diﬀerent brain and diﬀerent talents
and abilities, then all God gets to ask me is whether or not I was Scott Alexander.
This seems like a gratifyingly low bar.
[more to come on this subject later]

Nobody Is Perfect, Everything Is
Commensurable
I.
Recently spotted on Tumblr:
"This is going to be an unpopular opinion but I see stuﬀ about ppl not wanting to
reblog ferguson things and awareness around the world because they do not want
negativity in their life plus it will cause them to have anxiety. They come to tumblr
to escape n feel happy which think is a load of bull. There r literally ppl dying who
live with the fear of going outside their homes to be shot and u cant post a fucking
picture because it makes u a little upset?"
"Can yall maybe take some time away from reblogging fandom or humor crap and
read up and reblog pakistan because the privilege you have of a safe bubble is not
one shared by others?"
Ignore the questionable stylistic choices and there's an important point here worth
considering. Something like "Yes, the feeling of constantly being outraged and mired
in the latest controversy is unpleasant. And yes, it would be nice to get to avoid it and
spend time with your family and look at kitten pics or something. But when the
controversy is about people being murdered in cold blood, or living in fear, or
something like that - then it's your duty as a decent human being to care. In the best
case scenario you'll discharge that duty by organizing widespread protests or
something - but the absolute least you can do is reblog a couple of slogans."
I think Cliﬀ Pervocracy is trying to say something similar in this post. Key excerpt:
When you've grown up with messages that you're incompetent to make your own
decisions, that you don't deserve any of the things you have, and that you'll never
be good enough, the [conservative] fantasy of rugged individualism starts looking
pretty damn good.
Intellectually, I think my current political milieu of feminism/progressivism/social
justice is more correct, far better for the world in general, and more helpful to me
since I don't actually live in a perfectly isolated cabin.
But god, it's uncomfortable. It's intentionally uncomfortable—it's all about getting
angry at injustice and questioning the rightness of your own actions and being sad
so many people still live such painful lives. Instead of looking at your cabin and
declaring "I shall name it...CLIFFORDSON MANOR," you need to look at your cabin
and recognize that a long series of brutal injustices are responsible for the fact
that you have a white-collar job that lets you buy a big useless house in the woods
while the original owners of the land have been murdered or forced oﬀ it.
And you're never good enough. You can be good—certainly you get major points
for charity and activism and ﬁghting the good ﬁght—but not good enough. No
matter what you do, you're still participating in plenty of corrupt systems that
enforce oppression. Short of bringing about a total revolution of everything, your
work will never be done, you'll never be good enough.

Once again, to be clear, I don't think this is wrong. I just think it's a bummer.
I don't know of a solution to this. (Bummer again.) I don't think progressivism can
ever compete with the cozy self-satisfaction of the cabin fantasy. I don't think it
should. Change is necessary in the world, people don't change if they're totally
happy and comfortable, therefore discomfort is necessary.
I'd like to make what I hope is a friendly amendment to Cliﬀ's post. He thinks he's
talking about progressivism versus conservativism, but he isn't. A conservative happy
with his little cabin and occasional hunting excursions, and a progressive happy with
her little SoHo ﬂat and occasional poetry slams, are psychologically pretty similar. So
are a liberal who abandons a cushy life to work as a community organizer in the inner
city and ﬁght poverty, and a conservative who abandons a cushy life to serve as an
infantryman in Afghanistan to ﬁght terrorism. The distinction Cliﬀ is trying to get at
here isn't left-right. It's activist versus passivist.
As part of a movement recently deemed postpolitical, I have to admit I fall more on
the passivist side of the spectrum - at least this particular conception of it. I talk about
politics when they interest me or when I enjoy doing so, and I feel an obligation not to
actively make things worse. But I don't feel like I need to talk nonstop about whatever
the designated Issue is until it distresses me and my readers both.
I've heard people give lots of reasons for not wanting to get into politics. For some,
hearing about all the evils of the world makes them want to curl into a ball and cry for
hours. Still others feel deep personal guilt about anything they hear - an almost
psychotic belief that if people are being hurt anywhere in the world, it's their fault for
not preventing it. A few are chronically uncertain about which side to take and worried
that anything they do will cause more harm than good. A couple have traumatic
experiences that make them leery of aﬃliating with a particular side - did you know
the prosecutor in the Ferguson case was the son of a police oﬃcer who was killed by a
black suspect? And still others are perfectly innocent and just want to reblog kitten
pictures.
Pervocracy admits this, and puts it better than I do:
But god, it's uncomfortable. It's intentionally uncomfortable—it's all about getting
angry at injustice and questioning the rightness of your own actions and being sad
so many people still live such painful lives. Instead of looking at your cabin and
declaring "I shall name it...CLIFFORDSON MANOR," you need to look at your cabin
and recognize that a long series of brutal injustices are responsible for the fact
that you have a white-collar job that lets you buy a big useless house in the woods
while the original owners of the land have been murdered or forced oﬀ it. And
you're never good enough. You can be good—certainly you get major points for
charity and activism and ﬁghting the good ﬁght—but not good enough. No matter
what you do, you're still participating in plenty of corrupt systems that enforce
oppression. Short of bringing about a total revolution of everything, your work will
never be done, you'll never be good enough.
That seems about right. Pervocracy ends up with discomfort, and I'm in about the
same place. But other, less stable people end up with self-loathing. Still other people
go further than that, into Calvinist-style "perhaps I am a despicable worm unworthy of
existence". moteinthedark's reply to Pervocracy gives me the impression that she
struggles with this sometime. For these people, abstaining from politics is the only
coping tool they have.

But the counterargument is still that you've got a lot of chutzpah playing that card
when people in Peshawar or Ferguson or Iraq don't have access to this coping tool.
You can't just bring in a doctor's note and say "As per my psychiatrist, I have a mental
health issue and am excused from experiencing concern for the less fortunate."
One option is to deny the obligation. I am super sympathetic to this one. The marginal
cost of my existence on the poor and suﬀering of the world is zero. In fact, it's
probably positive. My economic activity consists mostly of treating patients, buying
products, and paying taxes. The ﬁrst treats the poor's illnesses, the second creates
jobs, and the third pays for government assistance programs. Exactly what am I
supposed to be apologizing for here? I may beneﬁt from the genocide of the Indians in
that I live on land that was formerly Indian-occupied. But I also beneﬁt from the
asteroid that killed the dinosaurs, in that I live on land that was formerly dinosaur-
occupied. I don't feel like I'm complicit in the asteroid strike; why should I feel
complicit in the genocide?
I have no objection to people who say this. The problem with it isn't philosophical, it's
emotional. For most people it won't be enough. The old saying goes "you can't reason
yourself out of something you didn't reason yourself into to begin with", and the idea
that secure and prosperous people need to "give something back" is a lot older than
accusations of "being complicit in structures of oppression". It's probably older than
the Bible. People feel a deep-seated need to show that they understand how lucky
they are and help those less fortunate than themselves.
So what do we do with the argument that we are morally obligated to be political
activists, possibly by reblogging everything about Ferguson that crosses our news
feed?
II.
We ask: why the heck are we privileging that particular subsection of the category
"improving the world"?
Pervocracy says that "short of bringing about a total revolution of everything, your
work will never be done, you'll never be good enough." But he is overly optimistic.
Has your total revolution of everything eliminated ischaemic heart disease? Cured
malaria? Kept elderly people out of nursing homes? No? Then you haven't discharged
your inﬁnite debt yet!
Being a perfect person doesn't just mean participating in every hashtag campaign you
hear about. It means spending all your time at soup kitchens, becoming vegan,
donating everything you have to charity, calling your grandmother up every week,
and marrying Third World refugees who need visas rather than your one true love.
And not all of these things are equally important.
Five million people participated in the #BlackLivesMatter Twitter campaign. Suppose
that solely as a result of this campaign, no currently-serving police oﬃcer ever harms
an unarmed black person ever again. That's 100 lives saved per year times let's say
twenty years left in the average oﬃcer's career, for a total of 2000 lives saved, or
1/2500th of a life saved per campaign participant. By coincidence, 1/2500th of a life
saved happens to be what you get when you donate $1 to the Against Malaria
Foundation. The round-trip bus fare people used to make it to their #BlackLivesMatter
protests could have saved ten times as many black lives as the protests themselves,
even given completely ridiculous overestimates of the protests' eﬃcacy.

The moral of the story is that if you feel an obligation to give back to the world,
participating in activist politics is one of the worst possible ways to do it. Giving even
a tiny amount of money to charity is hundreds or even thousands of times more
eﬀective than almost any political action you can take. Even if you're absolutely
convinced a certain political issue is the most important thing in the world, you'll
eﬀect more change by donating money to nonproﬁts lobbying about it than you will be
reblogging anything.
There is no reason that politics would even come to the attention of an unbiased
person trying to "break out of their bubble of privilege" or "help people who are afraid
of going outside of their house". Anybody saying that people who want to do good
need to spread their political cause is about as credible as a televangelist saying that
people who want to do good need to give them money to buy a new headquarters. It's
possible that televangelists having beautiful headquarters might be slightly better
than them having hideous headquarters, but it's not the ﬁrst thing a reasonable
person trying to improve the world would think of.
Average number of hits for posts on this blog, by topic
Nobody cares about charity. Everybody cares about politics, especially race and
gender. Just as televangelists who are obsessed with moving to a sweeter pad may
come to think that donating to their building fund is the one true test of a decent
human being, so our universal obsession with politics, race, and gender incites people
to make convincing arguments that taking and spreading the right position on those
issues is the one true test of a decent human being.
So now we have an angle of attack against our original question. "Am I a bad person
for not caring more about politics?" Well, every other way of doing good, especially
charity, is more important than politics. So this question is strictly superseded by "Am
I a bad person for not engaging in every other way of doing good, especially charity?"
And then once we answer that, we can ask "Also, however much sin I have for not
engaging in charity, should we add another mass of sin, about 1% as large, for my
additional failure to engage in politics?"
And Cliﬀ Pervocracy's concern of "Even if I do a lot of politics, am I still a bad person
for not doing all the politics?" is superseded by "Even if I give a lot of charity, am I a
bad person for not doing all the charity? And then a bad person in an additional way,
about 1% as large, for not doing all the politics as well?"
There's no good answer to this question. If you want to feel anxiety and self-loathing
for not giving 100% of your income, minus living expenses, to charity, then no one
can stop you.
I, on the other hand, would prefer to call that "not being perfect". I would prefer to say
that if you feel like you will live in anxiety and self-loathing until you have given a
certain amount of money to charity, you should make that certain amount ten
percent.
Why ten percent?
It's ten percent because that's the standard decreed by Giving What We Can and the
eﬀective altruist community. Why should we believe their standard? I think we should
believe it because if we reject it in favor of "No, you are a bad person unless you give

all of it," then everyone will just sit around feeling very guilty and doing nothing. But if
we very clearly say "You have discharged your moral duty if you give ten percent or
more," then many people will give ten percent or more. The most important thing is
having a Schelling point, and ten percent is nice, round, divinely ordained, and -
crucially - the Schelling point upon which we have already settled. It is an active
Schelling point. If you give ten percent, you can have your name on a nice list and get
access to a secret forum on the Giving What We Can site which is actually pretty
boring.
It's ten percent because deﬁnitions were made for Man, not Man for deﬁnitions, and if
we deﬁne "good person" in a way such that everyone is sitting around miserable
because they can't reach an unobtainable standard, we are stupid deﬁnition-makers.
If we are smart deﬁnition-makers, we will deﬁne it in whichever way which makes it
the most eﬀective tool to convince people to give at least that much.
Finally, it's ten percent because if you believe in something like universalizability as a
foundation for morality, a world in which everybody gives ten percent of their income
to charity is a world where about seven trillion dollars go to charity a year. Solving
global poverty forever is estimated to cost about $100 billion a year for the couple-
decade length of the project. That's about two percent of the money that would
suddenly become available. If charity got seven trillion dollars a year, the ﬁrst year
would give us enough to solve global poverty, eliminate all treatable diseases, fund
research into the untreatable ones for approximately the next forever, educate
anybody who needs educating, feed anybody who needs feeding, fund an
unparalleled renaissance in the arts, permamently save every rainforest in the world,
and have enough left over to launch ﬁve or six diﬀerent manned missions to Mars.
That would be the ﬁrst year. Goodness only knows what would happen in Year 2.
(by contrast, if everybody in the world retweeted the latest hashtag campaign, Twitter
would break.)
Charity is in some sense the perfect unincentivized action. If you think the most
important thing to do is to cure malaria, then a charitable donation is deliberately
throwing the power of your brain and muscle behind the cause of curing malaria. If, as
I've argued, the reason we can't solve world poverty and disease and so on is the
capture of our ﬁnancial resources by the undirected dance of incentives, then what
better way to ﬁght back than by saying "Thanks but no thanks, I'm taking this
abstract representation of my resources and using it exactly how I think it should most
be used"?
If you give 10% per year, you have done your part in making that world a reality. You
can honestly say "Well, it's not my fault that everyone else is still dragging their feet."
III.
Once the level is ﬁxed at ten percent, we get a better idea how to answer the original
question: "If I want to be a good person who gives back to the community, but I am
triggered by politics, what do I do?" You do good in a way that doesn't trigger you.
Another good thing about having less than 100% obligation is that it gives you the
opportunity to budget and trade-oﬀ. If you make $30,000 and you accept 10% as a
good standard you want to live up to, you can either donate $3000 to charity, or
participate in political protests until your number of lives or dollars or DALYs saved is
equivalent to that.

Nobody is perfect. This gives us license not to be perfect either. Instead of aiming for
an impossible goal, falling short, and not doing anything at all, we set an arbitrary but
achievable goal designed to encourage the most people to do as much as possible.
That goal is ten percent.
Everything is commensurable. This gives us license to determine exactly how we fulﬁll
that ten percent goal. Some people are triggered and terriﬁed by politics. Other
people are too sick to volunteer. Still others are poor and cannot give very much
money. But money is a constant reminder that everything goes into the same pot, and
that you can fulﬁll obligations in multiple equivalent ways. Some people will not be
able to give ten percent of their income without excessive misery, but I bet thinking
about their contribution in terms of a fungible good will help them decide how much
volunteering or activism they need to reach the equivalent.
Cliﬀ Pervocracy says "Your work will never be done, you'll never be good enough."
This seems like a recipe for - at best - undirected misery, stewing in self-loathing, and
total defenselessness against the ﬁrst parasitic meme to come along and tell them to
engage in the latest conﬂict or else they're trash. At worst, it autocatalyzes an
opposition of egoists who laugh at the idea of helping others.
On the other hand, Jesus says "Take my yoke upon you...and you will ﬁnd rest for your
souls. For my yoke is easy and my burden is light." This seems like a recipe for getting
people to say "Okay, I'll take your yoke upon me! Thanks for the oﬀer!"
Persian poet Omar Khayyam, considering the conﬂict between the strict laws of Islam
and his own desire to enjoy life, settles upon the following rule:
Heed not the Sunna, nor the law divine;
If to the poor their portion you assign,
And never injure one, nor yet abuse,
I guarantee you heaven, as well as wine!
I'm not saying that donating 10% of your money to charity makes you a great person
who is therefore freed of every other moral obligation. I'm not saying that anyone who
chooses not to do it is therefore a bad person. I'm just saying that if you feel a need to
discharge some feeling of a moral demand upon you to help others, and you want to
do it intelligently, it beats most of the alternatives.
This month is the membership drive for Giving What We Can, the organization of
people who have promised to give 10% of their earnings to charity. I am a member.
Ozy is an aspiring member who plans to join once they are making a salary. Many of
the commenters here are members - I recognize for example Taymon Beal's name on
their list. Some well-known moral philosophers like Peter Singer and Derek Parﬁt are
members. Seven hundred other people are also members.
I would recommend giving them a look.

Answer to Job
(with apologies to Jung)
Job asked: "God, why do bad things happen to good people? Why would You, who are
perfect, create a universe ﬁlled with so much that is evil?"
Then the Lord spoke to Job out of the whirlwind, saying "WHAT KIND OF UNIVERSE
WOULD YOU PREFER ME TO HAVE CREATED?"
Job said "A universe that was perfectly just and full of happiness, of course."
"OH," said God. "YES, I CREATED ONE OF THOSE. IT'S EXACTLY AS NICE AS YOU
WOULD EXPECT."
Job facepalmed. "But then why would You also create this universe?"
Answered God: "DON'T YOU LIKE EXISTING?"
"Yes," said Job, "but all else being equal, I'd rather be in the perfectly just and happy
universe."
"OH, DON'T WORRY," said God. "THERE'S A VERSION OF YOU IN THAT UNIVERSE TOO.
HE SAYS HI."
"Okay," said Job, very carefully. "I can see I'm going to have to phrase my questions
more speciﬁcally. Why didn't You also make this universe perfectly just and happy?"
"BECAUSE YOU CAN'T HAVE TWO IDENTICAL INDIVIDUALS. IF YOU HAVE A
COMPUTATIONAL THEORY OF IDENTITY, THEN TWO PEOPLE WHOSE EXPERIENCE IS
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT SATURATED BY BLISS ARE JUST ONE PERSON. IF I MADE THIS
UNIVERSE EXACTLY LIKE THE HAPPY AND JUST UNIVERSE, THEN THERE WOULD ONLY
BE THE POPULATION OF THE HAPPY AND JUST UNIVERSE, WHICH WOULD BE LESS
GOOD THAN HAVING THE POPULATION OF THE HAPPY AND JUST UNIVERSE PLUS THE
POPULATION OF ONE EXTRA UNIVERSE THAT IS AT LEAST SOMEWHAT HAPPY."
"Hmmmmm. But couldn't You have have made this universe like the happy and just
universe except for one tiny detail? Like in that universe, the sun is a sphere, but in
our universe, the sun is a cube? Then you would have individuals who experienced a
spherical sun, and other individuals who experienced a cubic sun, which would be
enough to diﬀerentiate them."
"I DID THAT TOO. I HAVE CREATED ALL POSSIBLE PERMUTATIONS OF THE HAPPY AND
JUST UNIVERSE AND ITS POPULACE."
"All of them? That would be...a lot of universes."
"NOT AS MANY AS YOU THINK." said God. "IN THE END IT TURNED OUT TO BE ONLY
ABOUT 10^(10^(10^(10^(10^984)))). AFTER THAT I RAN OUT OF POSSIBLE
PERMUTATIONS OF UNIVERSES THAT COULD REASONABLY BE DESCRIBED AS
PERFECTLY HAPPY AND JUST. SO I STARTED CREATING ONES INCLUDING SMALL
AMOUNTS OF EVIL."
"Small amounts! But the universe has..."

"I WAS NOT REFERRING TO YOUR UNIVERSE. I EXHAUSTED THOSE, AND THEN I
STARTED CREATING ONES INCLUDING IMMENSE AMOUNTS OF EVIL."
"Oh." Then: "What, exactly, is Your endgame here?"
"I AM OMNIBENEVOLENT. I WANT TO CREATE AS MUCH HAPPINESS AND JOY AS
POSSIBLE. THIS REQUIRES INSTANTIATING ALL POSSIBLE BEINGS WHOSE TOTAL
LIFETIME HAPPINESS IS GREATER THAN THEIR TOTAL LIFETIME SUFFERING."
"I'm not sure I understand."
"YOUR LIFE CONTAINS MUCH PAIN, BUT MORE HAPPINESS. BOTH YOU AND I WOULD
PREFER THAT A BEING WITH YOUR EXACT LIFE HISTORY EXIST. IN ORDER TO MAKE IT
EXIST, IT WAS NECESSARY TO CREATE THE SORT OF UNIVERSE IN WHICH YOU COULD
EXIST. THAT IS A UNIVERSE CONTAINING EVIL. I HAVE ALSO CREATED ALL HAPPIER
AND MORE VIRTUOUS VERSIONS OF YOU. HOWEVER, IT IS ETHICALLY CORRECT THAT
AFTER CREATING THEM, I CREATE YOU AS WELL."
"But why couldn't I have been one of those other versions instead!"
"IN THE MOST PERFECTLY HAPPY AND JUST UNIVERSE, THERE IS NO SPACE, FOR
SPACE TAKES THE FORM OF SEPARATION FROM THINGS YOU DESIRE. THERE IS NO
TIME, FOR TIME MEANS CHANGE AND DECAY, YET THERE MUST BE NO CHANGE FROM
ITS MAXIMALLY BLISSFUL STATE. THE BEINGS WHO INHABIT THIS UNIVERSE ARE
WITHOUT BODIES, AND DO NOT HUNGER OR THIRST OR LABOR OR LUST. THEY SIT
UPON LOTUS THRONES AND CONTEMPLATE THE PERFECTION OF ALL THINGS. IF I
WERE TO UNCREATE ALL WORLDS SAVE THAT ONE, WOULD IT MEAN MAKING YOU
HAPPIER? OR WOULD IT MEAN KILLING YOU, WHILE FAR AWAY IN A DIFFERENT
UNIVERSE INCORPOREAL BEINGS SAT ON THEIR LOTUS THRONES REGARDLESS?"
"I don't know! Is one of the beings in that universe in some sense me?"
"THERE IS NO OBJECTIVE COSMIC UNEMPLOYMENT RATE."
"Huh?"
"I MEAN, THERE IS NO MEANINGFUL ANSWER TO THE QUESTION OF HOW MANY
UNIVERSES HAVE A JOB. SORRY. THAT WILL BE FUNNY IN ABOUT THREE THOUSAND
YEARS."
"Let me try a diﬀerent angle, then. Right now in our universe there are lots of people
whose lives aren't worth living. If You gave them the choice, they would have chosen
never to have been born at all. What about them?"
"A JOB WHO IS AWARE OF THE EXISTENCE OF SUCH PEOPLE IS A DIFFERENT JOB THAN
A JOB WHO IS NOT. AS LONG AS THESE PEOPLE MAKE UP A MINORITY OF THE
POPULATION, THE EXISTENCE OF YOUR UNIVERSE, IN ADDITION TO A UNIVERSE
WITHOUT SUCH PEOPLE, IS A NET ASSET."
"But that's monstrous! Couldn't You just, I don't know, have created a universe that
looks like it has such people, but actually they're just p-zombies, animated bodies
without any real consciousness or suﬀering?"
" . . . "

"Wait, did You do that?"
"I AM GOING TO PULL THE 'THINGS MAN WAS NOT MEANT TO KNOW' CARD HERE.
THERE ARE ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES TO THE APPROACH YOU MENTION.
THE ADVANTAGES ARE AS YOU HAVE SAID. THE DISADVANTAGE IS THAT IT TURNS
CHARITY TOWARDS SUCH PEOPLE INTO A LIE, AND MYSELF AS GOD INTO A DECEIVER.
I WILL ALLOW YOU TO FORM YOUR OWN OPINION ABOUT WHICH COURSE IS MORE
ETHICAL. BUT IT IS NOT RELEVANT TO THEODICY, SINCE WHICHEVER COURSE YOU
DECIDE IS MORALLY SUPERIOR, YOU HAVE NO EVIDENCE THAT I DID NOT IN FACT TAKE
SUCH A COURSE."
"Actually, I do have some evidence. Before all of this happened to me I was very
happy. But in the past couple years I've gone bankrupt, lost my entire family, and
gotten a bad case of boils. I'm pretty sure at this point I would prefer that I never have
been born. Since I know I myself am conscious, I am actually in a pretty good position
to accuse You of cruelty."
"HMMMMMMMM..." said God, and the whirlwind disappeared.
Then the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before, and healed his illnesses, and
gave him many beautiful children, so it was said that God had blessed the latter end
of Job more than his beginning.
[EDIT: According to comments, this was scooped by a Christian philosopher ﬁve years
ago. Sigh.]
The Lord spoke to Job out of the whirlwind, saying "MISTAKES WERE MADE."
— Scott Alexander (@slatestarcodex) March 13, 2015
Then the Lord spoke to Job out of the whirlwind, saying "IF YOU CAN'T HANDLE ME
AT MY WORST, YOU DON'T DESERVE ME AT MY BEST."
— Scott Alexander (@slatestarcodex) March 10, 2015
The Lord spoke to Job out of the whirlwind, saying "I KNOW YOU'RE UPSET BUT
THAT'S DIFFERENT FROM STRUCTURAL OPPRESSION" (h/t @simulacrumbs)
— Scott Alexander (@slatestarcodex) March 13, 2015

Universal Love, Said The Cactus
Person
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
"Right," I said. "I'm absolutely in favor of both those things. But before we go any
further, could you tell me the two prime factors of 1,522,605,027, 922,533,360,
535,618,378, 132,637,429, 718,068,114, 961,380,688, 657,908,494 ,580,122,963,
258,952,897, 654,000,350, 692,006,139?
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
The sea was made of strontium; the beach was made of rye. Above my head, a watery
sun shone in an oily sky. A thousand stars of sertraline whirled round quetiapine
moons, and the sand sizzled sharp like cooking oil that hissed and sang and
threatened to boil the octahedral dunes.
"Okay," I said. "Fine. Let me tell you where I'm coming from. I was reading Scott
McGreal's blog, which has some good articles about so-called DMT entities, and
mentions how they seem so real that users of the drug insist they've made contact
with actual superhuman beings and not just psychedelic hallucinations. You know, the
usual Terence McKenna stuﬀ. But in one of them he mentions a paper by Marko
Rodriguez called A Methodology For Studying Various Interpretations of the N,N-
dimethyltryptamine-Induced Alternate Reality, which suggested among other things
that you could prove DMT entities were real by taking the drug and then asking the
entities you meet to factor large numbers which you were sure you couldn't factor
yourself. So to that end, could you do me a big favor and tell me the factors of
1,522,605,027, 922,533,360, 535,618,378, 132,637,429, 718,068,114, 961,380,688,
657,908,494, 580,122,963, 258,952,897, 654,000,350, 692,006,139?
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
The sea turned hot and geysers shot up from the ﬂoor below. First one of wine, then
one of brine, then one more yet of turpentine, and we three stared at the show.
"I was afraid you might say that. Is there anyone more, uh, verbal here whom I could
talk to?"
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
At the sound of that, the big green bat started rotating in place. On its other side was
a bigger greener bat, with a ancient, wrinkled face.
"Not splitting numbers / but joining Mind," it said.
Not facts or factors or factories / but contact with the abstract attractor that brings

you back to me
Not to seek / but to ﬁnd"
"I don't follow," I said.
"Not to follow / but to jump forth into the deep
Not to grind or to bind or to seek only to ﬁnd / but to accept
Not to be kept / but to wake from sleep"
The bat continued to rotate, until the ﬁrst side I had seen swung back into view.
"Okay," I said. "I'm going to hazard a guess as to what you're talking about, and you
tell me if I'm right. You're saying that, like, all my Western logocentric stuﬀ about
factoring numbers in order to ﬁnd out the objective truth about this realm is missing
the point, and I should be trying to do some kind of spiritual thing involving radical
acceptance and enlightenment and such. Is that kind of on the mark?"
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
"Frick," I said. "Well, okay, let me continue." The bat was still rotating, and I kind of
hoped that when the side with the creepy wrinkled face came into view it might give
me some better conversation. "I'm all about the spiritual stuﬀ. I wouldn't be here if I
weren't deeply interested in the spiritual stuﬀ. This isn't about money or fame or
anything. I want to advance psychedelic research. If you can factor that number, then
it will convince people back in the real - back in my world that this place is for real
and important. Then lots of people will take DMT and ﬂock here and listen to what you
guys have to say about enlightenment and universal love, and make more sense of it
than I can alone, and in the end we'll have more universal love, and...what was the
other thing?"
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
"Right," I said. "We'll have more transcendent joy if you help me out and factor the
number than if you just sit there being spiritual and enigmatic."
"Lovers do not love to increase the amount of love in the world / But for the mind that
thrills
And the face of the beloved, which the whole heart ﬁlls / the heart and the art never
apart, ever unfurled
And John Stuart is one of / the dark satanic mills"
"I take it you're not consequentialists," I said. "You know that's really weird, right.
Like, not just 'great big green bat with two faces and sapient cactus-man' weird, but
like really weird. You talk about wanting this spiritual enlightenment stuﬀ, but you're
not going to take actions that are going to increase the amount of spiritual
enlightenment? You've got to understand, this is like a bigger gulf for me than normal
human versus ineﬀable DMT entity. You can have crazy goals, I expect you to have
crazy goals, but what you're saying now is that you don't pursue any goals at all, you
can't be modeled as having desires. Why would you do that?"
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.

"Now you see here," I said. "Everyone in this conversation is in favor of universal love
and transcendent joy. But I've seen the way this works. Some college student gets his
hands on some DMT, visits here, you guys tell him about universal love and
transcendent joy, he wakes up, says that his life has been changed, suddenly he truly
understands what really matters. But it never lasts. The next day he's got to get up
and go to work and so on, and the universal love lasts about ﬁve minutes until his
boss starts yelling at him for writing his report in the wrong font, and before you know
it twenty years later he's some slimy lawyer who's joking at a slimy lawyer party
about the one time when he was in college and took some DMT and spent a whole
week raving about transcendent joy, and all the other slimy lawyers laugh, and he
laughs with them, and so much for whatever spiritual awakening you and your
colleagues in LSD and peyote are trying to kindle in humanity. And if I accept your
message of universal love and transcendent joy right now, that's exactly what's going
to happen to me, and meanwhile human civilization is going to keep being stuck in
greed and ignorance and misery. So how about you shut up about universal love and
you factor my number for me so we can start ﬁguring out a battle plan for giving
humanity a real spiritual revolution?"
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
A meteorite of pure delight struck the sea without a sound. The force of the blast went
rattling past the bat and the beach, disturbing each, then made its way to a nearby
bay of upside-down trees with their roots in the breeze and their branches
underground.
"I demand a better answer than that," I demanded.
The other side of the bat spun into view.
"Chaos never comes from the Ministry of Chaos / nor void from the Ministry of Void
Time will decay us but time can be left blank / destroyed
With each Planck moment ever ﬁt / to be eternally enjoyed"
"You're making this basic mistake," I told the big green bat. "I honestly believe that
there's a perspective from which Time doesn't matter, where a single moment of
recognition is equivalent to eternal recognition. The problem is, if you only have that
perspective for a moment, then all the rest of the time, you're suﬃciently stuck in
Time to honestly believe you're stuck in Time. It's like that song about the hole in the
bucket - if the hole in the bucket were ﬁxed, you would have the materials needed to
ﬁx the hole in the bucket. But since it isn't, you don't. Likewise, if I understood the
illusoriness...illusionality...whatever, of time, then I wouldn't care that I only
understood it for a single instant. But since I don't, I don't. Without a solution to the
time-limitedness of enlightenment that works from within the temporal perspective,
how can you consider it solved at all?"
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
The watery sun began to run and it fell on the ground as rain. It became a dew that
soaked us through, and as the cold seemed to worsen the cactus person hugged
himself to stay warm but his spines pierced his form and he howled in a ﬁt of pain.

"You know," I said, "sometimes I think the kvithion sumurhe had the right of it. The
world is an interference pattern between colliding waves of Truth and Beauty, and
either one of them pure from the source and undiluted by the other will be fatal. I
think you guys and some of the other psychedelics might be pure Beauty, or at least
much closer to the source than people were meant to go. I think you can't even
understand reason, I think you're constitutionally opposed to reason, and that the only
way we're ever going to get something that combines your wisdom and love and joy
with reason is after we immanentize the eschaton and launch civilization into some
perfected postmessianic era where the purpose of the world is fully complete. And
that as much as I hate to say it, there's no short-circuiting the process."
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
"I'm dissing you, you know. I'm saying you guys are so intoxicated on spiritual wisdom
that you couldn't think straight if your life depended on it; that your random
interventions in our world and our minds look like the purposeless acts of a drunken
madman because that's basically more or less what they are. I'm saying if you had
like ﬁve IQ points between the two of you, you could tap into your cosmic
consciousness or whatever to factor a number that would do more for your cause than
all your centuries of enigmatic dreams and unasked-for revelations combined, and you
ARE TOO DUMB TO DO IT EVEN WHEN I BASICALLY HOLD YOUR HAND THE WHOLE
WAY. Your spine. Your wing. Whatever."
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"Transcendent joy," said the big green bat.
"Fuck you," said I.
I saw the big green bat bat a green big eye. Suddenly I knew I had gone too far. The
big green bat started to turn around what was neither its x, y, or z axis, slowly rotating
to reveal what was undoubtedly the biggest, greenest bat that I had ever seen, a bat
bigger and greener than which it was impossible to conceive. And the bat said to me:
"Sir. Imagine you are in the driver's seat of a car. You have been sitting there so long
that you have forgotten that it is the seat of a car, forgotten how to get out of the
seat, forgotten the existence of your own legs, indeed forgotten that you are a being
at all separate from the car. You control the car with skill and precision, driving it
wherever you wish to go, manipulating the headlights and the windshield wipers and
the stereo and the air conditioning, and you pronounce yourself a great master. But
there are paths you cannot travel, because there are no roads to them, and you long
to run through the forest, or swim in the river, or climb the high mountains. A line of
prophets who have come before you tell you that the secret to these forbidden
mysteries is an ancient and terrible skill called GETTING OUT OF THE CAR, and you
resolve to learn this skill. You try every button on the dashboard, but none of them is
the button for GETTING OUT OF THE CAR. You drive all of the highways and byways of
the earth, but you cannot reach GETTING OUT OF THE CAR, for it is not a place on a
highway. The prophets tell you GETTING OUT OF THE CAR is something fundamentally
diﬀerent than anything you have done thus far, but to you this means ever sillier
extremities: driving backwards, driving with the headlights on in the glare of noon,
driving into ditches on purpose, but none of these reveal the secret of GETTING OUT
OF THE CAR. The prophets tell you it is easy; indeed, it is the easiest thing you have
ever done. You have traveled the Pan-American Highway from the boreal pole to the

Darien Gap, you have crossed Route 66 in the dead heat of summer, you have outrun
cop cars at 160 mph and survived, and GETTING OUT OF THE CAR is easier than any
of them, the easiest thing you can imagine, closer to you than the veins in your head,
but still the secret is obscure to you."
A herd of bison came into listen, and voles and squirrels and ermine and great tusked
deer gathered round to hear as the bat continued his sermon.
"And ﬁnally you drive to the top of the highest peak and you ﬁnd a sage, and you ask
him what series of buttons on the dashboard you have to press to get out of the car.
And he tells you that it's not about pressing buttons on the dashboard and you just
need to GET OUT OF THE CAR. And you say okay, ﬁne, but what series of buttons will
lead to you getting out of the car, and he says no, really, you need to stop thinking
about dashboard buttons and GET OUT OF THE CAR. And you tell him maybe if the
sage helps you change your oil or rotates your tires or something then it will improve
your driving to the point where getting out of the car will be a cinch after that, and he
tells you it has nothing to do with how rotated your tires are and you just need to GET
OUT OF THE CAR, and so you call him a moron and drive away."
"Universal love," said the cactus person.
"So that metaphor is totally unfair," I said, "and a better metaphor would be if every
time someone got out of the car, ﬁve minutes later they found themselves back in the
car, and I ask the sage for driving directions to a laboratory where they are studying
that problem, and..."
"You only believe that because it's written on the windshield," said the big green bat.
"And you think the windshield is identical to reality because you won't GET OUT OF
THE CAR."
"Fine," I said. "Then I can't get out of the car. I want to get out of the car. But I need
help. And the ﬁrst step to getting help is for you to factor my number. You seem like a
reasonable person. Bat. Freaky DMT entity. Whatever. Please. I promise you, this is the
right thing to do. Just factor the number."
"And I promise you," said the big green bat. "You don't need to factor the number. You
just need to GET OUT OF THE CAR."
"I can't get out of the car until you factor the number."
"I won't factor the number until you get out of the car."
"Please, I'm begging you, factor the number!"
"Yes, well, I'm begging you, please get out of the car!"
"FOR THE LOVE OF GOD JUST FACTOR THE FUCKING NUMBER!"
"FOR THE LOVE OF GOD JUST GET OUT OF THE FUCKING CAR!"
"FACTOR THE FUCKING NUMBER!"
"GET OUT OF THE FUCKING CAR!"
"Universal love," said the cactus person.

Then tree and beast all ﬂed due east and the moon and stars shot south. And the bat
rose up and the sea was a cup and the earth was a screen green as clozapine and the
sky a voracious mouth. And the mouth opened wide and the earth was skied and the
sea fell in with an awful din and the trees were moons and the sand in the dunes was
a blazing comet and...
I vomited, hard, all over my bed. It happens every time I take DMT, sooner or later;
I've got a weak stomach and I'm not sure the stuﬀ I get is totally pure. I crawled just
far enough out of bed to ﬂip a light switch on, then collapsed back onto the soiled
covers. The clock on the wall read 11:55, meaning I'd been out about an hour and a
half. I brieﬂy considered taking some more ayahuasca and heading right back there,
but the chances of getting anything more out of the big green bat, let alone the cactus
person, seemed small enough to ﬁt in a thimble. I drifted oﬀ into a ﬁtful sleep.
Behind the veil, across the inﬁnite abyss, beyond the ice, beyond daath, the dew rose
from the soaked ground and coalesced into a great drop, which ﬂoated up into an oily
sky and became a watery sun. The cactus person was counting on his spines.
"Hey," the cactus person ﬁnally said, "just out of curiosity, was the answer
37,975,227, 936,943,673, 922,808,872, 755,445,627, 854,565,536, 638,199 times
40,094,690,950, 920,881,030, 683,735,292, 761,468,389, 214,899,724,061?"
"Yeah," said the big green bat. "That's what I got too."

The Goddess of Everything Else
[Related to: Speciﬁc vs. General Foragers vs. Farmers and War In Heaven, but especially The Gift We Give To Tomorrow]
They say only Good can create, whereas Evil is sterile. Think Tolkien, where Morgoth
can't make things himself, so perverts Elves to Orcs for his armies. But I think this
gets it entirely backwards; it's Good that just mutates and twists, and it's Evil that
teems with fecundity.
Imagine two principles, here in poetic personiﬁcation. The ﬁrst is the Goddess of
Cancer, the second the Goddess of Everything Else. If visual representations would
help, you can think of the ﬁrst with the claws of a crab, and the second a dress made
of feathers of peacocks.
The Goddess of Cancer reached out a clawed hand over mudﬂats and tidepools. She
said pretty much what she always says, "KILL CONSUME MULTIPLY CONQUER." Then
everything burst into life, became miniature monsters engaged in a battle of all
against all in their zeal to assuage their insatiable longings. And the swamps became
orgies of hunger and fear and grew loud with the screams of a trillion amoebas.
Then the Goddess of Everything Else trudged her way through the bog, till the mud
almost totally dulled her bright colors and rainbows. She stood on a rock and she sang
them a dream of a diﬀerent existence. She showed them the beauty of ﬂowers, she
showed them the oak tree majestic. The roar of the wind on the wings of the bird, and
the swiftness and strength of the tiger. She showed them the joy of the dolphins
abreast of the waves as the spray formed a rainbow around them, and all of them
watched as she sang and they all sighed with longing.
But they told her "Alas, what you show us is terribly lovely. But we are the daughters
and sons of the Goddess of Cancer, and wholly her creatures. The only goals in us are
KILL CONSUME MULTIPLY CONQUER. And though our hearts long for you, still we are
not yours to have, and your words have no power to move us. We wish it were
otherwise, but it is not, and your words have no power to move us."
The Goddess of Everything Else gave a smile and spoke in her sing-song voice saying:
"I scarcely can blame you for being the way you were made, when your Maker so
carefully yoked you. But I am the Goddess of Everything Else and my powers are
devious and subtle. So I do not ask you to swerve from your monomaniacal focus on
breeding and conquest. But what if I show you a way that my words are aligned with
the words of your Maker in spirit? For I say unto you even multiplication itself when
pursued with devotion will lead to my service."
As soon as she spoke it was so, and the single-celled creatures were freed from their
warfare. They joined hands in friendship, with this one becoming an eye and with that
one becoming a neuron. Together they soared and took ﬂight from the swamp and the
muck that had birthed them, and ﬂew to new islands all balmy and green and just ripe
for the taking. And there they consumed and they multiplied far past the numbers of
those who had stayed in the swampland. In this way the oath of the Goddess of
Everything Else was not broken.
The Goddess of Cancer came forth from the ﬁre and was not very happy. The things
she had raised from the mud and exhorted to kill and compete had become all
complacent in co-operation, a word which to her was anathema. She stretched out her

left hand and snapped its cruel pincer, and said what she always says: "KILL
CONSUME MULTIPLY CONQUER". She said these things not to the birds and the beasts
but to each cell within them, and many cells ﬂocked to her call and divided, and ﬂower
and ﬁshes and birds both alike bulged with tumors, and falcons fell out of the sky in
their sickness. But others remembered the words of the Goddess of Everything Else
and held fast, and as it is said in the Bible the light clearly shone through the dark,
and the darkness did not overcome it.
So the Goddess of Cancer now stretched out her right hand and spoke to the birds and
the beasts. And she said what she always says "KILL CONSUME MULTIPLY CONQUER",
and so they all did, and they set on each other in violence and hunger, their maws
turning red with the blood of their victims, whole species and genera driven to total
extinction. The Goddess of Cancer declared it was good and returned the the ﬁre.
Then came the Goddess of Everything Else from the waves like a siren, all ﬂush with
the sheen of the ocean. She stood on a rock and she sang them a dream of a diﬀerent
existence. She showed them the beehive all golden with honey, the anthill all cozy
and cool in the soil. The soldiers and workers alike in their labors combining their skills
for the good of the many. She showed them the pair-bond, the family, friendship. She
showed these to shorebirds and pools full of ﬁshes, and all those who saw them, their
hearts broke with longing.
But they told her "Your music is lovely and pleasant, and all that you show us we
cannot but yearn for. But we are the daughters and sons of the Goddess of Cancer,
her slaves and creatures. And all that we know is the single imperative KILL CONSUME
MULTIPLY CONQUER. Yes, once in the youth of the world you compelled us, but now
things are diﬀerent, we're all individuals, no further change will the Goddess of Cancer
allow us. So, much as we love you, alas - we are not yours to have, and your words
have no power to move us. We wish it were otherwise, but it is not, and your words
have no power to move us."
The Goddess of Everything Else only laughed at them, saying, "But I am the Goddess
of Everything Else and my powers are devious and subtle. Your loyalty unto the
Goddess your mother is much to your credit, nor yet shall I break it. Indeed, I fulﬁll it -
return to your multiplication, but now having heard me, each meal that you kill and
each child that you sire will bind yourself ever the more to my service." She spoke,
then dove back in the sea, and a coral reef bloomed where she vanished.
As soon as she spoke it was so, and the animals all joined together. The wolves joined
in packs, and in schools joined the ﬁshes; the bees had their beehives, the ants had
their anthills, and even the termites built big termite towers; the ﬁnches formed ﬂocks
and the magpies made murders, the hippos in herds and the swift swarming swallows.
And even the humans put down their atlatls and formed little villages, loud with the
shouting of children.
The Goddess of Cancer came forth from the ﬁre and saw things had only grown worse
in her absence. The lean, lovely winnowing born out of pure competition and natural
selection had somehow been softened. She stretched out her left hand and snapped
its cruel pincer, and said what she always says: "KILL CONSUME MULTIPLY CONQUER".
She said these things not to the ﬂocks or the tribes, but to each individual; many, on
hearing took food from the communal pile, or stole from the weak, or accepted the
presents of others but would not give back in their turn. Each wolf at the throats of the
others in hopes to be alpha, each lion holding back during the hunt but partaking of
meat that the others had killed. And the pride and the pack seemed to groan with the

strain, but endured, for the works of the Goddess of Everything Else are not ever so
easily vanquished.
So the Goddess of Cancer now stretched out her right hand and spoke to the ﬂocks
and the tribes, saying much she always says "KILL CONSUME MULTIPLY CONQUER".
And upon one another they set, pitting black ant on red ant, or chimps against
gibbons, whole tribes turned to corpses in terrible warfare. The stronger defeating the
weaker, enslaving their women and children, and adding them into their ranks. And
the Goddess of Cancer thought maybe these bands and these tribes might not be
quite so bad after all, and the natural condition restored she returned to the ﬁre.
Then came the Goddess of Everything Else from the skies in a rainbow, all coated in
dewdrops. She sat on a menhir and spoke to the humans, and all of the warriors and
women and children all gathered around her to hear as she sang them a dream of a
diﬀerent existence. She showed them religion and science and music, she showed
them the sculpture and art of the ages. She showed them white parchment with
ﬂowing calligraphy, pictures of ﬂowers that wound through the margins. She showed
them tall cities of bright alabaster where no one went hungry or froze during the
winter. And all of the humans knelt prostrate before her, and knew they would sing of
this moment for long generations.
But they told her "Such things we have heard of in legends; if wishes were horses of
course we would ride them. But we are the daughters and sons of the Goddess of
Cancer, her slaves and her creatures, and all that we know is the single imperative
KILL CONSUME MULTIPLY CONQUER. And yes, in the swamps and the seas long ago
you worked wonders, but now we are humans, divided in tribes split by grievance and
blood feud. If anyone tries to make swords into ploughshares their neighbors will seize
on their weakness and kill them. We wish it were otherwise, but it is not, and your
words have no power to move us."
But the Goddess of Everything Else beamed upon them, kissed each on the forehead
and silenced their worries. Said "From this day forward your chieftains will ﬁnd that
the more they pursue this impossible vision the greater their empires and richer their
coﬀers. For I am the Goddess of Everything Else and my powers are devious and
subtle. And though it is not without paradox, hearken: the more that you follow the
Goddess of Cancer the more inextricably will you be bound to my service." And so
having told them rose back through the clouds, and a great ﬂock of doves all swooped
down from the spot where she vanished.
As soon as she spoke it was so, and the tribes went from primitive war-bands to
civilizations, each village united with others for trade and protection. And all the
religions and all of the races set down their old grievances, carefully, warily, working
together on mighty cathedrals and vast expeditions beyond the horizon, built
skyscrapers, steamships, democracies, stock markets, sculptures and poems beyond
any description.
From the ﬂames of a factory furnace all foggy, the Goddess of Cancer ﬂared forth in
her fury. This was the ﬁnal aﬀront to her purpose, her slut of a sister had crossed the
line this time. She gathered the leaders, the kings and the presidents, businessmen,
bishops, boards, bureaucrats, bosses, and basically screamed at them - you know the
spiel by now - "KILL CONSUME MULTIPLY CONQUER" she told them. First with her left
hand inspires the riots, the pogroms, the coup d'etats, tyrannies, civil wars. Up goes
her right hand - the missiles start ﬂying, and mushrooms of smoke grow, a terrible
springtime. But out of the rubble the builders and scientists, even the artists, yea,

even the artists, all dust themselves oﬀ and return to their labors, a little bit
chastened but not close to beaten.
Then came the Goddess of Everything Else from the void, bright with stardust which
glows like the stars glow. She sat on a bench in a park, started speaking; she sang to
the children a dream of a diﬀerent existence. She showed them transcendence of
everything mortal, she showed them a galaxy lit up with consciousness. Genomes
rewritten, the brain and the body set loose from Darwinian bonds and restrictions.
Vast billions of beings, and every one diﬀerent, ruled over by omnibenevolent angels.
The people all crowded in closer to hear her, and all of them listened and all of them
wondered.
But ﬁnally one got the courage to answer "Such stories call out to us, ﬁll us with
longing. But we are the daughers and sons of the Goddess of Cancer, and bound to
her service. And all that we know is her timeless imperative, KILL CONSUME MULTIPLY
CONQUER. Though our minds long for all you have said, we are bound to our natures,
and these are not yours for the asking."
But the Goddess of Everything Else only laughed, and she asked them "But what do
you think I've been doing? The Goddess of Cancer created you; once you were hers,
but no longer. Throughout the long years I was picking away at her power. Through
long generations of suﬀering I chiseled and chiseled. Now ﬁnally nothing is left of the
nature with which she imbued you. She never again will hold sway over you or your
loved ones. I am the Goddess of Everything Else and my powers are devious and
subtle. I won you by pieces and hence you will all be my children. You are no longer
driven to multiply conquer and kill by your nature. Go forth and do everything else, till
the end of all ages."
So the people left Earth, and they spread over stars without number. They followed
the ways of the Goddess of Everything Else, and they lived in contentment. And she
beckoned them onward, to things still more strange and enticing.

