
Participating in a Covid-19 Vaccination Trial
1. Participating in a Covid-19 Vaccine Trial
2. Participating in a Covid-19 Vaccine Trial #2: We pretty much knew it would work
the whole time
3. Participating in a Covid-19 Vaccine Trial #3: I Hope I feel Worse Tomorrow

Participating in a Covid-19 Vaccine Trial
This is a linkpost for https://eidan.substack.com/p/the-vaccine-trial-chronicles-1
I live near Stony Brook University, which has a well-known hospital and medical school.
About a month ago I signed up to participate in research related to Covid-19. As a work-from-
homer, this was a way I could reasonably get a vaccine without resorting to "skipping the
line" or pretending I had a pre-existing condition. Today I received my ﬁrst dose. Here is the
story to date. I plan to post at least one follow-up to this.
The study I'm participating in is a phase III trial for the Novavax vaccine. Studies in the UK
and South Africa already have demonstrated it to be safe and eﬀective (at least to a similar
standard as the Pﬁzer and Moderna options). Novavax also has the added advantage that it
can be kept stable at higher temperatures than the mRNA vaccines. I'm not opposed in
principle to studying its eﬃcacy more, but I think it's silly that this trial has to happen before
it can be distributed or used in the US. FDA Delenda Est.
Day -2: Registration
I receive a phone call from a lady calling herself Bella. Bella asks if I am still interested in
participating in Covid-19 vaccine trials. I am. She takes my name, address, medical history,
etc. She says to expect an email with directions to the clinic and some videos to watch.
Day -1: Orientation
In the morning there is an email from Bella with links to a required series of introductory
videos. After each video there are a few questions to make sure I was paying attention. The
videos are old. I can tell they are old because the second one says "There is no approved
vaccine available for Covid-19." Unforced error count: 1. One of the questions for this video
asks if there are any approved vaccines available for Covid-19. I know what will happen if I
get a question "wrong," and I don't want to try asking anyone to update the form, so I select
"no." I've already entered a simulacrum. I learn that if I participate in the study, I will receive
the Novavax Covid-19 vaccine with probability 2/3 or a placebo with probability 1/3, and earn
up to $1700 depending on how diligently I participate in follow-up. Sounds great.
Day 0: First Visit and Vaccination
I get in the car and drive to Stony Brook University Medical Center's satellite clinic in
Commack, NY. I walk in to a large lobby. A sign on the information desk says "COVID-19
STUDY: ROOM 201." I go to suite 201 and enter another lobby. I walk up to the receptionist.
Am I here for a nasal swab? No, I'm here for the vaccine trial. What is my name? I say my
name. I'm not on the list. She hands me the list of names. I should not be allowed to see the
list of participants, I'm just some random dude! Unforced error count: 2. I conﬁrm I'm not on
the list. She hands me a post-it to write my name down. I write it and take a seat.
While I'm waiting my phone rings. A voice introduces herself as Kathryn and asks if I've
found the trial. Yes I have, I'm in the waiting room right now, I just gave the woman my
name. Which room am I in? 201. That's the wrong room; that one is doing a diﬀerent trial. I
should wait and she'll come get me; it should only be a minute.
I get up and explain to the receptionist that I was in the wrong room and she can forget
about me. She discards the post-it. No reason to sit in the same room with other people
when there's an empty hallway nearby. Social distancing, right? I wait outside room 201. A
woman in scrubs walks up. Are you Kathryn? Uh, no. Oops, sorry. Another woman in scrubs
approaches. Are you Kathryn, here to bring me to the vaccine trial? No, I'm just getting my
steps in. I grow uncomfortable accosting innocent female healthcare workers and reenter

suite 201. I sit back down to wait. Another minute passes and Kathryn arrives. She is not
wearing scrubs.
Kathryn leads me down a stairway and makes some small talk. I mention that I'm
interviewing later today with a startup involved in prediction markets. "Interesting!" I infer
she either misunderstands what I meant by prediction markets or is politely pretending to
know what they are. We reach the correct suite and go into a room. It is barren aside from
two chairs, a desk, and a computer. Can I please conﬁrm my name and birthday? I do. Do I
consent to participate in the study? I do. Do I wish for the researchers to share information
with my primary care doctor? That sounds complicated. No thanks. Do I consent to having
leftover blood samples used for other research? Sure. Am I aware that they might not take
blood samples even though they've asked that question? I suppose I am. Am I aware that I
can answer no to either of the past two questions and still participate in the vaccine study?
Yes.
The entire time we're in the room the door is closed. I presume this is required to protect my
privacy, but I notice that the reduced ventilation increases the chance of SARS-CoV-2
transmission. I'm wearing an n95 under a surgical mask and Kathryn is wearing a face shield
over a surgical mask, so I decide it's not worth raising the issue. I conclude opening the door
wouldn't meaningfully aﬀect my privacy but only slightly reduce infection risk. Still, unforced
error count: 3.
After scheduling my next appointment, Kathryn gets up and exits, returning a few moments
later with an iPad. I sign a form on the screen. On the next page I sign again. Kathryn takes
the iPad and passes me a clipboard with more consent forms and an emergency contact
information form. As I'm ﬁlling those out Kathryn asks how involved I am in trading stocks.
Huh? Oh, right, I talked about prediction markets. The conversation takes a brief detour
through the recent GameStop and AMC short squeezes. I give a basic explanation of
prediction markets, and say I am interested in how prediction markets can aﬀect the future. I
propose that if prediction markets were a normal thing, then (for example) perhaps back in
January of last year, when the WHO was still really hesitant to sound the alarm on Covid-19,
a bunch of private citizens/experts could have made bets that large numbers of Coronavirus
cases would arise. Then, maybe people and governments could have reacted somewhat
faster, inferring from the bets that despite the WHO's assurances a pandemic was likely.
Kathryn's eyes go wide. Wait, did I just rationality-pill this lady? I hand her the completed
forms.
Kathryn leads me through a hallway to another room with your standard doctor's oﬃce
furniture. I sit on the exam chair. Kathryn leaves and is replaced by a young nurse. Her name
is Rose and she takes my medical history. (Of course, she closes the door ﬁrst). Can I conﬁrm
my name and birthday? I do. What prescriptions am I on? I tell her. Do I take any vitamins? D
and B12. Herbal supplements? None. Do I have cancer? No. Have I done any drugs? "No, I'm
a very good boy," I answer. Rose giggles; we have a rapport. Have I been in contact with any
conﬁrmed cases of Covid-19 in the past 10 weeks? No.
Then some demographic questions. Am I hispanic or latino? No. (It occurs to me later I
accidentally answered that question in Spanish, which may have been confusing). What is
my race? I'm a bit complicated. I prefer to write "Jewish" if the question allows, but I basically
look White.
Halfway through Rose is joined by an older nurse. She doesn't introduce herself and starts
prepping a blood draw kit. Rose takes my blood pressure and pulse. Older Nurse turns to me
and asks me to conﬁrm my name and birthday, which I do. She begins to repeat other
questions that Rose has already asked, but Rose interrupts and tells her she has already
covered it. Thank god. Rose removes the blood pressure cuﬀ and Older Nurse wraps a
tourniquet around the freed arm. She ﬁlls a few vials while Rose is typing away at a
computer.

I know from experience I don't react well (purely psychosomatically, probably) to blood
draws, but I also know this volume is smaller than a normal blood test so I don't expect to
react too strongly. I am wrong. Once the needle is removed, I have my usual minute or two of
dizziness, nausea, and sweating, which promptly causes Rose to overreact. I'm handed
multiple cups of water, a juice box, and a granola bar. By the time they come back to check
on me I am completely recovered.
I'm pretty hairy, so for small wounds (like needle holes) I prefer not to use tape or sticky
bandages. Older Nurse doesn't let me refuse for some reason. I've never had this happen
before. I wonder if I've oﬀended her for some reason that she wants to cause me such a
petty amount of pain.
Rose leaves. Older Nurse gives me a Covid-19 nasal swab, collects her blood samples, and
follows. She returns a few minutes later and hands me a thick stack of copied consent forms.

Did I really consent to this much stuﬀ?
She also has a bag of three testing kits, a clear ruler, and a thermometer. The ruler is for
measuring any redness around the injection site. She demonstrates to me how to use a ruler.
"Each of these lines is .1, or 1/16 of an inch. So if you were to measure something as 1 and
11/16ths, you should write 1.11." This system of mathematics is beyond my understanding.

Unforced error count: 4. She explains how I would swab myself and take my temperature. If I
have symptoms, I may be asked to swab once a day for three days after I report them. Older
Nurse asks if I understand. I do. Have I received the vaccine shot yet? No, they must be
saving the fun part, I answer. She doesn't laugh. Why doesn't Older Nurse like me? Rose
liked me. I miss Rose.

One of the supplied nasal swab kits.
Older Nurse leaves and I'm alone for a minute or two. Then a man walks in. He is a nurse
practitioner and is going to give me a brief physical exam. Can I conﬁrm my name and
birthday?
Nurse Practitioner asks me some medical history questions that are largely redundant with
the ones Rose asked. I consider mentioning this, but I realize that Rose must have been
taking my medical history for the hospital, but Nurse Practitioner is taking my medical
history for the experiment, and of course I shouldn't expect them to talk to each other. More
of an unforced inconvenience than an unforced error, I guess. New questions include: Do I
have any allergies to phosphate-enhanced saline? Do I have any allergies to saponin, a.k.a.
Soap Bark? He also asks about who I live with and their occupations. I deduce he is trying to
get an idea of my risk of coronavirus exposure. NP asks me to stand up and touch my toes,
checks my ears and throat, and does the normal physical exam ritual. Then he asks me to
smile, frown, puﬀ out my cheeks, and raise my eyebrows. I think he's joking at ﬁrst, but then
realize he's conﬁrming I do not have Bell's palsy. NP is satisﬁed I'm in good health and
leaves.
A new nurse comes in. Her name is Mary. Can I please conﬁrm my name and birthday? I
conﬁrm for what feels like the twentieth time. Mary gives me a mystery shot, which was the
Novavax vaccine with probability 2/3. Mary tells me that I have to wait at least half an hour
before leaving in case of any adverse reaction and hands me a nurse call button. Press here
if too lonely. I crack myself up. Mary leaves.

The call button and my post-blood draw resuscitation snacks. Yum.
Another woman walks in and instructs me in downloading and using a health diary app,
PatientCloud. It is all very straightforward and we ﬂy through the tutorial. She also hands me
a check for $170. Cool. I'm all done!

Example questions from PatientCloud.
I have about ﬁfteen minutes before my half-hour observation period is up. I want to leave
early but I'm concerned it might jeopardize my study participation or otherwise get someone
in trouble. I wait, and then step outside. I remove my mask and take in the cool air on the
way to my car. A ﬂute concerto plays on NPR as I turn on Suﬀolk County Route 4 and head
home.
My next appointment is in March. I will receive my second dose then.

Participating in a Covid-19 Vaccine Trial
#2: We pretty much knew it would work
the whole time
The past few weeks have been uneventful. I spend a few minutes each day ﬁlling out a
questionnaire on the Patient Cloud app I installed during my ﬁrst visit. The study is interested
in reactions to the injection itself: redness, swelling, pain, etc. around the injection site, and
the ﬁrst section of the questionnaire checks for these symptoms. The next part is a self-
screen for Covid-19 itself. Using the thermometer the nurses gave me, I take and report my
temperature. There's a checklist of symptoms to look out for: malaise, nausea, fatigue, etc.
I've had nothing interesting to report, which I'm sure is a delight to the researchers.
I have my next injection appointment in about a week - I planned to write this second update
sometime after that, since I would have a better idea of whether or not I received the
placebo treatment. However, I got a very interesting email today (image below):
Dear PREVENT-19 Study Participant:
Novavax is happy to announce that thanks to many volunteers like you, we have
completed enrollment in the PREVENT-19 study. We want to thank you for your
commitment to participation as without it, we would not be able to progress this very
important research into a new COVID-19 vaccine.
We also want to take the opportunity to notify you that the Institutional Review Board
(IRB) has approved Novavax's plan for a blinded crossover. What this means is that all
participants will eventually receive the real vaccine. For this to happen, we ﬁrst need to
demonstrate that the vaccine is safe and does prevent COVID-19 disease.  Participants
who choose to remain in the study on their blinded treatment (sic). We anticipate that
between one to two more months of follow-up will be required to reach that goal.
Crossover vaccinations will be planned to follow thereafter.
We thank you for the extremely valuable contribution you are making to research and to
society during these trying and challenging times.
Kind Regards,
The Novavax Team

My ﬁrst response was a sense of relief that, worst case, I would likely receive the real vaccine
within a few months. But then my critical thinking booted up. We are still experiencing a
national (and global) shortage of vaccines - If the Novavax vaccines are believed safe and
eﬀective, shouldn't they be going into the same supply of vaccines that everyone else is
being served out of? I came up with two possible answers to this question. (Spoiler: both of
them suck)
1. I am getting special priority because I volunteered to participate. If that is true, is that
kind of kickback scheme remotely ethical? To participate in the trial, I needed to have
the time, energy, and ability to sign up online, transport myself to the site, and then
spend part of my day answering questions and letting the nurses poke and prod me a
bit - all of which was made considerably easier by ability to speak English, access to a
car, resources and free time, etc., in other words, exactly NOT the kinds of things
according to which we should be allocating vaccines.
2. Novavax and the experimental team think it's safe and eﬀective enough to do the
cross-over and give the control group the real vaccine, but the Very Serious People in
charge of US vaccine approvals don't. In that case, we're just back to the regular story
of an abundance of caution causing senseless morbidity and mortality; blah blah blah
FDA Delenda Est.
Of course this is all occurring with the backdrop of the Novavax vaccine already having been
tested with great results overseas, and oh my god why haven't we been distributing this
thing since last month?
If it turns out that I was randomized into the placebo group and they oﬀer me the real
treatment sometime in the future, I plan to take it despite not being particularly vulnerable -
I don't think me refusing on principle would result in someone else getting the dose any
faster, but it might result in a lot of wasted eﬀort contacting me repeatedly while the dose
meant for me sits in a freezer unused.

Participating in a Covid-19 Vaccine
Trial #3: I Hope I feel Worse Tomorrow
Today is four weeks to the day after my ﬁrst injection, and I received my second at my
appointment this morning. The process was very similar to my ﬁrst visit: I entered and
met ﬁrst with someone who led me through paperwork and asked a series of
screening questions, then had a brief medical exam, got my shot, waited 30 minutes
in case of any acute reaction, and left. Notable diﬀerences this time:
The entire process seemed less repetitive and went by faster (both subjectively
and objectively). I was also ﬁlling out fewer forms than last time and wasn't
getting any orientation so this makes sense.
I was told that my follow-up meeting "had to" be scheduled for two weeks from
now by order of Novavax. This is sooner than was speciﬁed in the study design. I
suspect they have enough data already to show that it works so they are
planning to close the site.
In the middle of my health exam, someone rang a Nurse Call button and the
doctor ran out of the room. A few minutes later the Nurse Practitioner from last
month came in and ﬁnished up. The building we were in is also used a clinic for
World Trade Center survivors and ﬁrst responders (and probably other health
care I don't know about) so it's possible that this was totally unrelated, but the
call would imply that someone had a reaction to the injection.
There were speciﬁc instructions to inject the 2nd dose in the opposite arm from
the ﬁrst dose. I am right-handed so I used my left arm last time, which meant I
had to use my dominant hand this time. The second round is more likely to have
side eﬀects though, so I wish I had known this to begin with. By word-of-mouth
from a medical professional (my mom), apparently some people have reported
pain in the ﬁrst injection site after getting their second dose. So maybe they are
looking for that.
Doors were mostly kept open by default instead of closed by default. The ﬁrst
person asking me health-related questions even asked me if I wanted to close
the door.
When I received my shot the NP mentioned that most people don't have side eﬀects
from the vaccine. He also said the side eﬀects seem to have a similar proﬁle as the
Pﬁzer and Moderna vaccines, namely mild ﬂu-like symptoms for a day or two. This was
not exactly supported by the literature I ended up reading.
Did I get the Placebo? Using Bayes' Theorem
I would like to have a better idea of my chances at having received the real vaccine.
The experiment randomized 2 people into the trial group for every 1 person in the
control. This gives a prior odds of 2:1.
There are two pieces of evidence: my symptoms after the ﬁrst injection (none), and
my symptoms after the second injection (to be observed over the next day or so).
These are obviously not independent. I need to know how much more likely I am to
experience side eﬀects from the real injection than the placebo.
After reading a few unhelpful press releases, I found my way to medrxiv.org and
entered NVX-CoV2373 into the search bar. I found a few papers which seemed likely to

have the information I was looking for.
Estimating Likelihood Ratios
This ﬁrst study was a phase II investigation of dose response; in simpler language,
they were giving people diﬀerent amounts of vaccine and seeing what happened.
They also broke their study population into two age cohorts (18-59 and 60-84).
Younger patients were on average more prone to react at all stages and doses. Data
are not available but there are graphs (Fig. 2) and some statistics in the text. All of the
numbers here are read oﬀ of graphs and are approximate.
"Local" adverse eﬀects from the vaccine include pain, swelling, tenderness etc. at
injection site, while "Systemic" adverse eﬀects include fever, nausea, or malaise. The
study had one placebo group and two pairs of dosed groups; each pair used a
diﬀerent dose size in their vaccines. Within each pair of dosed groups, one group
received two doses and one group received a placebo shot for their second dose.
At least one local adverse eﬀect was reported by:
15% of placebo participants on the ﬁrst shot, 10% on the second shot
50% of the 5-microgram dose group participants on the ﬁrst shot, 70% on the
second shot
65% of the 25-microgram group participants on the ﬁrst shot, 80% on the
second shot
For the second shot, about 10% of participants who received a placebo that round
reported local adverse eﬀects, whether or not they received a real vaccine for their
ﬁrst dose.
Systemic adverse eﬀects were reported by:
Roughly 40% of people in all groups after the ﬁrst shot
20% of people receiving the placebo for their 2nd shot
50% of the 5-microgram group after their 2nd shot
60% of the 25-microgram group after their 2nd shot
For younger participants, the gaps between placebo and treatment groups was a bit
larger - younger people reacted to vaccines more often - so I'm tempted to bump all of
those ﬁgures up a bit in my own calculation (I am in my 20s).
The second study I read had a very similar design, but participants generally reported
more symptoms than in the ﬁrst one I discussed. I suspect whichever method they
used to ask participants about their symptoms was more sensitive - for example, more
than a third of the placebo group reported a headache, which counts as a systemic
adverse eﬀect - so these numbers might be inﬂated. Even if this is true, there's almost
no reports of fever from any of the participants, which surprised me. Looking at the
other systemic eﬀects, it looks like fatigue, malaise, and muscle pain were each all
about two or three times more common in the treatment groups than the control
group.
Finally, I read this meta-analysis which apparently has done most of the work for me:
For the meta-analysis, we separated the adverse events based on vaccine vs.
placebo injection as reported by individual studies. In general, we observed there
was an increase in total adverse events for subjects with low dose vaccine

injection [OR: 2.86; 95% CI: 1.90-4.29, P < 0.00001]. Especially, the local
reactions were signiﬁcantly enhanced in subjects with low dose vaccine groups
[OR: 2.07; 95% CI: 1.07-4.00, P = 0.03]. However, the systemic reactions were no
signiﬁcantly changed between vaccine and placebo groups [OR: 1.28; 95% CI:
0.67-2.43, P = 0.46].
The doses used by the Novavax PREVENT-19 trial are 5 micrograms, at the lowest end
of the doses used in these papers. The analysis of high-dose vaccines yielded
modestly higher odds ratios (there was a signiﬁcant increase in systemic reactions for
high-dose participants vs placebo) but the same general picture.
Integrating all of this evidence in a reasonable way is not a trivial problem, but they
don't seem to disagree too much - the odds ratio for having local adverse eﬀects
seems to be about 1.5-4, and the odds ratio for systemic adverse eﬀects a little lower
than that. The systemic reaction doesn't seem to be very diagnostic and it's probably
correlated to the local reaction in ways I don't understand and am uneasy guessing
about. So to a ﬁrst approximation I will just update on the presence or absence of local
adverse eﬀects.
Conclusion
At the time I am publishing this, it's been about 6 hours since the injection. I have a
slight pain my right arm and general malaise, but not to such a degree that I am sure
I'm not imagining it. Hopefully I feel worse tomorrow!
If I do, I'd update my posterior odds to be 2:1 times 2:1 = 4:1. I'd be about 80%
conﬁdent I received the real vaccine.
If I don't, I'd update my posterior odds to be 2:1 times 1:2 = 1:1. I'd be about 50%
conﬁdent I received the real vaccine.
Since I'm young, and younger people tended to have vaccine reactions more reliably,
these could probably be treated as (very rough) lower and upper bounds, respectively,
e.g. I would be at least 80% or at most 50% conﬁdent I received the real treatment
depending on the case. In the unlikely event I wake up with crushing fatigue and
nausea or aching all over, I reserve the right ignore these estimates and throw myself
a party.

