
Politics and Pragmatics
1. I Can Tolerate Anything Except The Outgroup
2. Book Review: Albion's Seed
3. Albion's Seed, Genotyped
4. Society Is Fixed, Biology Is Mutable
5. A Philosopher Walks Into A Coﬀee Shop
6. The Witching Hour

I Can Tolerate Anything Except The
Outgroup
[Content warning: Politics, religion, social justice, spoilers for "The Secret of Father
Brown". This isn't especially original to me and I don't claim anything more than to be
explaining and rewording things I have heard from a bunch of other people.
Unapologetically America-centric because I'm not informed enough to make it
otherwise. Try to keep this oﬀ Reddit and other similar sorts of things.]
I.
In Chesterton's The Secret of Father Brown
, a beloved nobleman who murdered his good-for-nothing brother in a duel thirty years
ago returns to his hometown wracked by guilt. All the townspeople want to forgive
him immediately, and they mock the titular priest for only being willing to give a
measured forgiveness conditional on penance and self-reﬂection. They lecture the
priest on the virtues of charity and compassion.
Later, it comes out that the beloved nobleman did not in fact kill his good-for-nothing
brother. The good-for-nothing brother killed the beloved nobleman (and stole his
identity). Now the townspeople want to see him lynched or burned alive, and it is only
the priest who - consistently - oﬀers a measured forgiveness conditional on penance
and self-reﬂection.
The priest tells them:
It seems to me that you only pardon the sins that you don't really think sinful. You
only forgive criminals when they commit what you don't regard as crimes, but
rather as conventions. You forgive a conventional duel just as you forgive a
conventional divorce. You forgive because there isn't anything to be forgiven.
He further notes that this is why the townspeople can self-righteously consider
themselves more compassionate and forgiving than he is. Actual forgiveness, the kind
the priest needs to cultivate to forgive evildoers, is really really hard. The fake
forgiveness the townspeople use to forgive the people they like is really easy, so they
get to boast not only of their forgiving nature, but of how much nicer they are than
those mean old priests who ﬁnd forgiveness diﬃcult and want penance along with it.
After some thought I agree with Chesterton's point. There are a lot of people who say
"I forgive you" when they mean "No harm done", and a lot of people who say "That
was unforgiveable" when they mean "That was genuinely really bad". Whether or not
forgiveness is right is a complicated topic I do not want to get in here. But since
forgiveness is generally considered a virtue, and one that many want credit for
having, I think it's fair to say you only earn the right to call yourself 'forgiving' if you
forgive things that genuinely hurt you.
To borrow Chesterton's example, if you think divorce is a-ok, then you don't get to
"forgive" people their divorces, you merely ignore them. Someone who thinks divorce

is abhorrent can "forgive" divorce. You can forgive theft, or murder, or tax evasion, or
something you ﬁnd abhorrent.
I mean, from a utilitarian point of view, you are still doing the correct action of not
giving people grief because they're a divorcee. You can have all the Utility Points you
want. All I'm saying is that if you "forgive" something you don't care about, you don't
earn any Virtue Points.
(by way of illustration: a billionaire who gives $100 to charity gets as many Utility
Points as an impoverished pensioner who donates the same amount, but the latter
gets a lot more Virtue Points)
Tolerance is also considered a virtue, but it suﬀers the same sort of dimished
expectations forgiveness does.
The Emperor summons before him Bodhidharma and asks: "Master, I have been
tolerant of innumerable gays, lesbians, bisexuals, asexuals, blacks, Hispanics, Asians,
transgender people, and Jews. How many Virtue Points have I earned for my
meritorious deeds?"
Bodhidharma answers: "None at all".
The Emperor, somewhat put out, demands to know why.
Bodhidharma asks: "Well, what do you think of gay people?"
The Emperor answers: "What do you think I am, some kind of homophobic bigot? Of
course I have nothing against gay people!"
And Bodhidharma answers: "Thus do you gain no merit by tolerating them!"
II.
If I had to deﬁne "tolerance" it would be something like "respect and kindness toward
members of an outgroup".
And today we have an almost unprecedented situation.
We have a lot of people - like the Emperor - boasting of being able to tolerate
everyone from every outgroup they can imagine, loving the outgroup, writing long
paeans to how great the outgroup is, staying up at night fretting that somebody else
might not like the outgroup enough.
This is really surprising. It's a total reversal of everything we know about human
psychology up to this point. No one did any genetic engineering. No one passed out
weird glowing pills in the public schools. And yet suddenly we get an entire group of
people who conspicuously promote and defend their outgroups, the outer the better.
What is going on here?
Let's start by asking what exactly an outgroup is.
There's a very boring sense in which, assuming the Emperor's straight, gays are part
of his "outgroup" ie a group that he is not a member of. But if the Emperor has curly
hair, are straight-haired people part of his outgroup? If the Emperor's name starts with
the letter 'A', are people whose names start with the letter 'B' part of his outgroup?

Nah. I would diﬀerentiate between multiple diﬀerent meanings of outgroup, where one
is "a group you are not a part of" and the other is...something stronger.
I want to avoid a very easy trap, which is saying that outgroups are about how
diﬀerent you are, or how hostile you are. I don't think that's quite right.
Compare the Nazis to the German Jews and to the Japanese. The Nazis were very
similar to the German Jews: they looked the same, spoke the same language, came
from a similar culture. The Nazis were totally diﬀerent from the Japanese: diﬀerent
race, diﬀerent language, vast cultural gap. But the Nazis and Japanese mostly got
along pretty well. Heck, the Nazis were actually moderately positively disposed to the
Chinese, even when they were technically at war. Meanwhile, the conﬂict between the
Nazis and the German Jews - some of whom didn't even realize they were anything
other than German until they checked their grandparents' birth certiﬁcate - is the stuﬀ
of history and nightmares. Any theory of outgroupishness that naively assumes the
Nazis' natural outgroup is Japanese or Chinese people will be totally inadequate.
And this isn't a weird exception. Freud spoke of the narcissism of small diﬀerences,
saying that "it is precisely communities with adjoining territories, and related to each
other in other ways as well, who are engaged in constant feuds and ridiculing each
other". Nazis and German Jews. Northern Irish Protestants and Northern Irish
Catholics. Hutus and Tutsis. South African whites and South African blacks. Israeli Jews
and Israeli Arabs. Anyone in the former Yugoslavia and anyone else in the former
Yugoslavia.
So what makes an outgroup? Proximity plus small diﬀerences. If you want to know
who someone in former Yugoslavia hates, don't look at the Indonesians or the Zulus or
the Tibetans or anyone else distant and exotic. Find the Yugoslavian ethnicity that
lives closely intermingled with them and is most conspicuously similar to them, and
chances are you'll ﬁnd the one who they have eight hundred years of seething hatred
toward.
What makes an unexpected in-group? The answer with Germans and Japanese is
obvious - a strategic alliance. In fact, the World Wars forged a lot of unexpected
temporary pseudo-friendships. A recent article from War Nerd points out that the
British, after spending centuries subjugating and despising the Irish and Sikhs,
suddenly needed Irish and Sikh soldiers for World Wars I and II respectively. "Crush
them beneath our boots" quickly changed to fawning songs about how "there never
was a coward where the shamrock grows" and endless paeans to Sikh military
prowess.
Sure, scratch the paeans even a little bit and you ﬁnd condescension as strong as
ever. But eight hundred years of the British committing genocide against the Irish and
considering them literally subhuman turned into smiles and songs about shamrocks
once the Irish started looking like useful cannon fodder for a larger ﬁght. And the
Sikhs, dark-skinned people with turbans and beards who pretty much exemplify the
European stereotype of "scary foreigner", were lauded by everyone from the news
media all the way up to Winston Churchill.
In other words, outgroups may be the people who look exactly like you, and scary
foreigner types can become the in-group on a moment's notice when it seems
convenient.
III.

There are certain theories of dark matter where it barely interacts with the regular
world at all, such that we could have a dark matter planet exactly co-incident with
Earth and never know. Maybe dark matter people are walking all around us and
through us, maybe my house is in the Times Square of a great dark matter city,
maybe a few meters away from me a dark matter blogger is writing on his dark matter
computer about how weird it would be if there was a light matter person he couldn't
see right next to him.
This is sort of how I feel about conservatives.
I don't mean the sort of light-matter conservatives who go around complaining about
Big Government and occasionally voting for Romney. I see those guys all the time.
What I mean is - well, take creationists. According to Gallup polls, about 46% of
Americans are creationists. Not just in the sense of believing God helped guide
evolution. I mean they think evolution is a vile atheist lie and God created humans
exactly as they exist right now. That's half the country.
And I don't have a single one of those people in my social circle. It's not because I'm
deliberately avoiding them; I'm pretty live-and-let-live politically, I wouldn't ostracize
someone just for some weird beliefs. And yet, even though I probably know about a
hundred ﬁfty people, I am pretty conﬁdent that not one of them is creationist. Odds of
this happening by chance? 1/2^150 = 1/10^45 = approximately the chance of
picking a particular atom if you are randomly selecting among all the atoms on Earth.
About forty percent of Americans want to ban gay marriage. I think if I really stretch it,
maybe ten of my top hundred ﬁfty friends might fall into this group. This is less
astronomically unlikely; the odds are a mere one to one hundred quintillion against.
People like to talk about social bubbles, but that doesn't even begin to cover one
hundred quintillion. The only metaphor that seems really appropriate is the bizarre
dark matter world.
I live in a Republican congressional district in a state with a Republican governor. The
conservatives are deﬁnitely out there. They drive on the same roads as I do, live in the
same neighborhoods. But they might as well be made of dark matter. I never meet
them.
To be fair, I spend a lot of my time inside on my computer. I'm browsing sites like
Reddit.
Recently, there was a thread on Reddit asking - Redditors Against Gay Marriage, What
Is Your Best Supporting Argument? A Reddit user who didn't understand how anybody
could be against gay marriage honestly wanted to know how other people who were
against it justiﬁed their position. He ﬁgured he might as well ask one of the largest
sites on the Internet, with an estimated user base in the tens of millions.
It soon became clear that nobody there was actually against gay marriage.
There were a bunch of posts saying "I of course support gay marriage but here are
some reasons some other people might be against it," a bunch of others saying "my
argument against gay marriage is the government shouldn't be involved in the
marriage business at all", and several more saying "why would you even ask this
question, there's no possible good argument and you're wasting your time". About
halfway through the thread someone started saying homosexuality was unnatural and
I thought they were going to be the ﬁrst one to actually answer the question, but at

the end they added "But it's not my place to decide what is or isn't natural, I'm still
pro-gay marriage."
In a thread with 10,401 comments, a thread speciﬁcally asking for people against gay
marriage, I was eventually able to ﬁnd two people who came out and opposed it, way
near the bottom. Their posts started with "I know I'm going to be downvoted to hell
for this..."
But I'm not only on Reddit. I also hang out on LW.
On last year's survey, I found that of American LWers who identify with one of the two
major political parties, 80% are Democrat and 20% Republican, which actually sounds
pretty balanced compared to some of these other examples.
But it doesn't last. Pretty much all of those "Republicans" are libertarians who
consider the GOP the lesser of two evils. When allowed to choose "libertarian" as an
alternative, only 4% of visitors continued to identify as conservative. But that's still...
some. Right?
When I broke the numbers down further, 3 percentage points of those are
neoreactionaries, a bizarre sect that wants to be ruled by a king. Only one percent of
LWers were normal everyday God-'n-guns-but-not-George-III conservatives of the type
that seem to make up about half of the United States.
It gets worse. My formative years were spent at a university which, if it was similar to
other elite universities, had a faculty and a student body that skewed about 90-10
liberal to conservative - and we can bet that, like LW, even those few token
conservatives are Mitt Romney types rather than God-n'-guns types. I get my news
from vox.com, an Oﬃcial Liberal Approved Site. Even when I go out to eat, it turns out
my favorite restaurant, California Pizza Kitchen, is the most liberal restaurant in the
United States.
I inhabit the same geographical area as scores and scores of conservatives. But
without meaning to, I have created an outrageously strong bubble, a 10^45 bubble.
Conservatives are all around me, yet I am about as likely to have a serious encounter
with one as I am a Tibetan lama.
(Less likely, actually. One time a Tibetan lama came to my college and gave a really
nice presentation, but if a conservative tried that, people would protest and it would
be canceled.)
IV.
One day I realized that entirely by accident I was fulﬁlling all the Jewish stereotypes.
I'm nerdy, over-educated, good with words, good with money, weird sense of humor,
don't get outside much, I like deli sandwiches. And I'm a psychiatrist, which is about
the most stereotypically Jewish profession short of maybe stand-up comedian or rabbi.
I'm not very religious. And I don't go to synagogue. But that's stereotypically Jewish
too!
I bring this up because it would be a mistake to think "Well, a Jewish person is by
deﬁnition someone who is born of a Jewish mother. Or I guess it sort of also means
someone who follows the Mosaic Law and goes to synagogue. But I don't care about

Scott's mother, and I know he doesn't go to synagogue, so I can't gain any useful
information from knowing Scott is Jewish."
The deﬁning factors of Judaism - Torah-reading, synagogue-following, mother-having -
are the tip of a giant iceberg. Jews sometimes identify as a "tribe", and even if you
don't attend synagogue, you're still a member of that tribe and people can still (in a
statistical way) infer things about you by knowing your Jewish identity - like how likely
they are to be psychiatrists.
The last section raised a question - if people rarely select their friends and associates
and customers explicitly for politics, how do we end up with such intense political
segregation?
Well, in the same way "going to synagogue" is merely the iceberg-tip of a Jewish tribe
with many distinguishing characteristics, so "voting Republican" or "identifying as
conservative" or "believing in creationism" is the iceberg-tip of a conservative tribe
with many distinguishing characteristics.
A disproportionate number of my friends are Jewish, because I meet them at
psychiatry conferences or something - we self-segregate not based on explicit religion
but on implicit tribal characteristics. So in the same way, political tribes self-segregate
to an impressive extent - a 1/10^45 extent, I will never tire of hammering in - based
on their implicit tribal characteristics.
The people who are actually into this sort of thing sketch out a bunch of speculative
tribes and subtribes, but to make it easier, let me stick with two and a half.
The Red Tribe is most classically typiﬁed by conservative political beliefs, strong
evangelical religious beliefs, creationism, opposing gay marriage, owning guns, eating
steak, drinking Coca-Cola, driving SUVs, watching lots of TV, enjoying American
football, getting conspicuously upset about terrorists and commies, marrying early,
divorcing early, shouting "USA IS NUMBER ONE!!!", and listening to country music.
The Blue Tribe is most classically typiﬁed by liberal political beliefs, vague
agnosticism, supporting gay rights, thinking guns are barbaric, eating arugula,
drinking fancy bottled water, driving Priuses, reading lots of books, being highly
educated, mocking American football, feeling vaguely like they should like soccer but
never really being able to get into it, getting conspicuously upset about sexists and
bigots, marrying later, constantly pointing out how much more civilized European
countries are than America, and listening to "everything except country".
(There is a partly-formed attempt to spin oﬀ a Grey Tribe typiﬁed by libertarian
political beliefs, Dawkins-style atheism, vague annoyance that the question of gay
rights even comes up, eating paleo, drinking Soylent, calling in rides on Uber, reading
lots of blogs, calling American football "sportsball", getting conspicuously upset about
the War on Drugs and the NSA, and listening to ﬁlk - but for our current purposes this
is a distraction and they can safely be considered part of the Blue Tribe most of the
time)
I think these "tribes" will turn out to be even stronger categories than politics. Harvard
might skew 80-20 in terms of Democrats vs. Republicans, 90-10 in terms of liberals vs.
conservatives, but maybe 99-1 in terms of Blues vs. Reds.
It's the many, many diﬀerences between these tribes that explain the strength of the
ﬁlter bubble - which have I mentioned segregates people at a strength of 1/10^45?

Even in something as seemingly politically uncharged as going to California Pizza
Kitchen or Sushi House for dinner, I'm restricting myself to the set of people who like
cute artisanal pizzas or sophsticated foreign foods, which are classically Blue Tribe
characteristics.
Are these tribes based on geography? Are they based on race, ethnic origin, religion,
IQ, what TV channels you watched as a kid? I don't know.
Some of it is certainly genetic - estimates of the genetic contribution to political
association range from 0.4 to 0.6. Heritability of one's attitudes toward gay rights
range from 0.3 to 0.5, which hilariously is a little more heritable than homosexuality
itself.
(for an interesting attempt to break these down into more rigorous concepts like
"traditionalism", "authoritarianism", and "in-group favoritism" and ﬁnd the genetic
loading for each see here. For an attempt to trace the speciﬁc genes involved, which
mostly turn out to be NMDA receptors, see here)
But I don't think it's just genetics. There's something else going on too. The word
"class" seems like the closest analogue, but only if you use it in the sophisticated Paul
Fussell Guide Through the American Status System way instead of the boring "another
word for how much money you make" way.
For now we can just accept them as a brute fact - as multiple coexisting societies that
might as well be made of dark matter for all of the interaction they have with one
another - and move on.
V.
The worst reaction I've ever gotten to a blog post was when I wrote about the death of
Osama bin Laden. I've written all sorts of stuﬀ about race and gender and politics and
whatever, but that was the worst.
I didn't come out and say I was happy he was dead. But some people interpreted it
that way, and there followed a bunch of comments and emails and Facebook
messages about how could I possibly be happy about the death of another human
being, even if he was a bad person? Everyone, even Osama, is a human being, and we
should never rejoice in the death of a fellow man. One commenter came out and said:
I'm surprised at your reaction. As far as people I casually stalk on the internet (ie,
LJ and Facebook), you are the ﬁrst out of the "intelligent, reasoned and
thoughtful" group to be uncomplicatedly happy about this development and not to
be, say, disgusted at the reactions of the other 90% or so.
This commenter was right. Of the "intelligent, reasoned, and thoughtful" people I
knew, the overwhelming emotion was conspicuous disgust that other people could be
happy about his death. I hastily backtracked and said I wasn't happy per se, just
surprised and relieved that all of this was ﬁnally behind us.
And I genuinely believed that day that I had found some unexpected good in people -
that everyone I knew was so humane and compassionate that they were unable to
rejoice even in the death of someone who hated them and everything they stood for.
Then a few years later, Margaret Thatcher died. And on my Facebook wall - made of
these same "intelligent, reasoned, and thoughtful" people - the most common

response was to quote some portion of the song "Ding Dong, The Witch Is Dead".
Another popular response was to link the videos of British people spontaneously
throwing parties in the street, with comments like "I wish I was there so I could join
in". From this exact same group of people, not a single expression of disgust or a
"c'mon, guys, we're all human beings here."
I gently pointed this out at the time, and mostly got a bunch of "yeah, so what?",
combined with links to an article claiming that "the demand for respectful silence in
the wake of a public ﬁgure's death is not just misguided but dangerous".
And that was when something clicked for me.
You can talk all you want about Islamophobia, but my friend's "intelligent, reasoned,
and thoughtful people" - her name for the Blue Tribe - can't get together enough
energy to really hate Osama, let alone Muslims in general. We understand that what
he did was bad, but it didn't anger us personally. When he died, we were able to very
rationally apply our better nature and our Far Mode beliefs about how it's never right
to be happy about anyone else's death.
On the other hand, that same group absolutely loathed Thatcher. Most of us (though
not all) can agree, if the question is posed explicitly, that Osama was a worse person
than Thatcher. But in terms of actual gut feeling? Osama provokes a snap judgment of
"ﬂawed human being", Thatcher a snap judgment of "scum".
I started this essay by pointing out that, despite what geographical and cultural
distance would suggest, the Nazis' outgroup was not the vastly diﬀerent Japanese, but
the almost-identical German Jews.
And my hypothesis, stated plainly, is that if you're part of the Blue Tribe, then your
outgroup isn't al-Qaeda, or Muslims, or blacks, or gays, or transpeople, or Jews, or
atheists - it's the Red Tribe.
VI.
"But racism and sexism and cissexism and anti-Semitism are these giant all-
encompassing social factors that verge upon being human universals! Surely you're
not arguing that mere political diﬀerences could ever come close to them!"
One of the ways we know that racism is a giant all-encompassing social factor is the
Implicit Association Test. Psychologists ask subjects to quickly identify whether words
or photos are members of certain gerrymandered categories, like "either a white
person's face or a positive emotion" or "either a black person's face and a negative
emotion". Then they compare to a diﬀerent set of gerrymandered categories, like
"either a black person's face or a positive emotion" or "either a white person's face or
a negative emotion." If subjects have more trouble (as measured in latency time)
connecting white people to negative things than they do white people to positive
things, then they probably have subconscious positive associations with white people.
You can try it yourself here.
Of course, what the test famously found was that even white people who claimed to
have no racist attitudes at all usually had positive associations with white people and
negative associations with black people on the test. There are very many claims and
counterclaims about the precise meaning of this, but it ended up being a big part of
the evidence in favor of the current consensus that all white people are at least a little
racist.

Anyway, three months ago, someone ﬁnally had the bright idea of doing an Implicit
Association Test with political parties, and they found that people's unconscious
partisan biases were half again as strong as their unconscious racial biases (h/t
Bloomberg. For example, if you are a white Democrat, your unconscious bias against
blacks (as measured by something called a d-score) is 0.16, but your unconscious bias
against Republicans will be 0.23. The Cohen's d for racial bias was 0.61, by the book a
"moderate" eﬀect size; for party it was 0.95, a "large" eﬀect size.
Okay, ﬁne, but we know race has real world consequences. Like, there have been
several studies where people sent out a bunch of identical resumes except sometimes
with a black person's photo and other times with a white person's photo, and it was
noticed that employers were much more likely to invite the ﬁctional white candidates
for interviews. So just some stupid Implicit Association Test results can't compare to
that, right?
Iyengar and Westwood also decided to do the resume test for parties. They asked
subjects to decide which of several candidates should get a scholarship (subjects were
told this was a genuine decision for the university the researchers were aﬃliated
with). Some resumes had photos of black people, others of white people. And some
students listed their experience in Young Democrats of America, others in Young
Republicans of America.
Once again, discrimination on the basis of party was much stronger than
discrimination on the basis of race. The size of the race eﬀect for white people was
only 56-44 (and in the reverse of the expected direction); the size of the party eﬀect
was about 80-20 for Democrats and 69-31 for Republicans.
If you want to see their third experiment, which applied yet another classic
methodology used to detect racism and once again found partyism to be much
stronger, you can read the paper.
I & W did an unusually thorough job, but this sort of thing isn't new or ground-
breaking. People have been studying "belief congruence theory" - the idea that
diﬀerences in beliefs are more important than demographic factors in forming in-
groups and outgroups - for decades. As early as 1967, Smith et al were doing surveys
all over the country and ﬁnding that people were more likely to accept friendships
across racial lines than across beliefs; in the forty years since then, the observation
has been replicated scores of times. Insko, Moe, and Nacoste's 2006 review Belief
Congruence And Racial Discrimination concludes that:
. The literature was judged supportive of a weak version of belief congruence
theory which states that in those contexts in which social pressure is nonexistent
or ineﬀective, belief is more important than race as a determinant of racial or
ethnic discrimination. Evidence for a strong version of belief congruence theory
(which states that in those contexts in which social pressure is nonexistent, or
ineﬀective, belief is the only determinant of racial or ethnic discrimination) and
was judged much more problematic.
One of the best-known examples of racism is the "Guess Who's Coming To Dinner"
scenario where parents are scandalized about their child marrying someone of a
diﬀerent race. Pew has done some good work on this and found that only 23% of
conservatives and 1% (!) of liberals admit they would be upset in this situation. But
Pew also asked how parents would feel about their child marrying someone of a
diﬀerent political party. Now 30% of conservatives and 23% of liberals would get

upset. Average them out, and you go from 12% upsetness rate for race to 27%
upsetness rate for party - more than double. Yeah, people do lie to pollsters, but a
picture is starting to come together here.
(Harvard, by the way, is a tossup. There are more black students - 11.5% - than
conservative students - 10% - but there are more conservative faculty than black
faculty.)
Since people will delight in misinterpreting me here, let me overemphasize what I am
not saying. I'm not saying people of either party have it "worse" than black people, or
that partyism is more of a problem than racism, or any of a number of stupid things
along those lines which I am sure I will nevertheless be accused of believing. Racism is
worse than partyism because the two parties are at least kind of balanced in numbers
and in resources, whereas the brunt of an entire country's racism falls on a few
underprivileged people. I am saying that the underlying attitudes that produce
partyism are stronger than the underlying attitudes that produce racism, with no
necessary implications on their social eﬀects.
But if we want to look at people's psychology and motivations, partyism and the
particular variant of tribalism that it represents are going to be fertile ground.
VII.
Every election cycle like clockwork, conservatives accuse liberals of not being
suﬃciently pro-America. And every election cycle like clockwork, liberals give
extremely unconvincing denials of this.
"It's not that we're, like, against America per se. It's just that...well, did you know
Europe has much better health care than we do? And much lower crime rates? I mean,
come on, how did they get so awesome? And we're just sitting here, can't even get
the gay marriage thing sorted out, seriously, what's wrong with a country that can't...
sorry, what were we talking about? Oh yeah, America. They're okay. Cesar Chavez was
really neat. So were some other people outside the mainstream who became famous
precisely by criticizing majority society. That's sort of like America being great, in that
I think the parts of it that point out how bad the rest of it are often make excellent
points. Vote for me!"
(sorry, I make fun of you because I love you)
There was a big brouhaha a couple of years ago when, as it ﬁrst became apparent
Obama had a good shot at the Presidency, Michelle Obama said that "for the ﬁrst time
in my adult life, I am proud of my country."
Republicans pounced on the comment, asking why she hadn't felt proud before, and
she backtracked saying of course she was proud all the time and she loves America
with the burning fury of a million suns and she was just saying that the Obama
campaign was particularly inspiring.
As unconvincing denials go, this one was pretty far up there. But no one really held it
against her. Probably most Obama voters felt vaguely the same way. I was an Obama
voter, and I have proud memories of spending my Fourth of Julys as a kid debunking
people's heartfelt emotions of patriotism. Aaron Sorkin:
[What makes America the greatest country in the world?] It's not the greatest
country in the world! We're seventh in literacy, 27th in math, 22nd in science,

49th in life expectancy, 178th in infant mortality, third in median household
income, No. 4 in labor force, and No. 4 in exports. So when you ask what makes us
the greatest country in the world, I don't know what the f*** you're talking about.
(Another good retort is "We're number one? Sure - number one in incarceration rates,
drone strikes, and making new parents go back to work!")
All of this is true, of course. But it's weird that it's such a classic interest of members
of the Blue Tribe, and members of the Red Tribe never seem to bring it up.
("We're number one? Sure - number one in levels of sexual degeneracy! Well, I guess
probably number two, after the Netherlands, but they're really small and shouldn't
count.")
My hunch - both the Red Tribe and the Blue Tribe, for whatever reason, identify
"America" with the Red Tribe. Ask people for typically "American" things, and you end
up with a very Red list of characteristics - guns, religion, barbecues, American
football, NASCAR, cowboys, SUVs, unrestrained capitalism.
That means the Red Tribe feels intensely patriotic about "their" country, and the Blue
Tribe feels like they're living in fortiﬁed enclaves deep in hostile territory.
Here is a popular piece published on a major media site called America: A Big, Fat,
Stupid Nation. Another: America: A Bunch Of Spoiled, Whiny Brats. Americans are
ignorant, scientiﬁcally illiterate religious fanatics whose "patriotism" is actually just
narcissism. You Will Be Shocked At How Ignorant Americans Are, and we should Blame
The Childish, Ignorant American People.
Needless to say, every single one of these articles was written by an American and
read almost entirely by Americans. Those Americans very likely enjoyed the articles
very much and did not feel the least bit insulted.
And look at the sources. HuﬀPo, Salon, Slate. Might those have anything in common?
On both sides, "American" can be either a normal demonym, or a code word for a
member of the Red Tribe.
VIII.
The other day, I logged into OKCupid and found someone who looked cool. I was
reading over her proﬁle and found the following sentence:
Don't message me if you're a sexist white guy
And my ﬁrst thought was "Wait, so a sexist black person would be okay? Why?"
(The girl in question was white as snow)
Around the time the Ferguson riots were ﬁrst starting, there were a host of articles
with titles like Why White People Don't Seem To Understand Ferguson, Why It's So
Hard For Whites To Understand Ferguson, and White Folks Listen Up And Let Me Tell
You What Ferguson Is All About, this last of which says:
Social media is full of people on both sides making presumptions, and believing
what they want to believe. But it's the white folks that don't understand what this
is all about. Let me put it as simply as I can for you [...]

No matter how wrong you think Trayvon Martin or Michael Brown were, I think we
can all agree they didn't deserve to die over it. I want you white folks to
understand that this is where the anger is coming from. You focused on the
looting...."
And on a hunch I checked the author photos, and every single one of these articles
was written by a white person.
White People Are Ruining America? White. White People Are Still A Disgrace? White.
White Guys: We Suck And We're Sorry? White. Bye Bye, Whiny White Dudes? White.
Dear Entitled Straight White Dudes, I'm Evicting You From My Life? White. White
Dudes Need To Stop Whitesplaining? White. Reasons Why Americans Suck #1: White
People? White.
We've all seen articles and comments and articles like this. Some unsavory people try
to use them to prove that white people are the real victims or the media is biased
against white people or something. Other people who are very nice and optimistic use
them to show that some white people have developed some self-awareness and are
willing to engage in self-criticism.
But I think the situation with "white" is much the same as the situation with
"American" - it can either mean what it says, or be a code word for the Red Tribe.
(except on the blog Stuﬀ White People Like, where it obviously serves as a code word
for the Blue tribe. I don't know, guys. I didn't do it.)
I realize that's making a strong claim, but it would hardly be without precedent. When
people say things like "gamers are misogynist", do they mean the 52% of gamers who
are women? Do they mean every one of the 59% of Americans from every walk of life
who are known to play video or computer games occasionally? No. "Gamer" is a
coded reference to the Gray Tribe, the half-branched-oﬀ collection of libertarianish
tech-savvy nerds, and everyone knows it. As well expect that when people talk about
"fedoras", they mean Indiana Jones. Or when they talk about "urban youth", they
mean freshmen at NYU. Everyone knows exactly who we mean when we say "urban
youth", and them being young people who live in a city has only the most tenuous of
relations to the actual concept.
And I'm saying words like "American" and "white" work the same way. Bill Clinton was
the "ﬁrst black President", but if Herman Cain had won in 2012 he'd have been the
43rd white president. And when an angry white person talks at great length about
how much he hates "white dudes", he is not being humble and self-critical.
IX.
Imagine hearing that a liberal talk show host and comedian was so enraged by the
actions of ISIS that he'd recorded and posted a video in which he shouts at them for
ten minutes, cursing the "fanatical terrorists" and calling them "utter savages" with
"savage values".
If I heard that, I'd be kind of surprised. It doesn't ﬁt my model of what liberal talk show
hosts do.
But the story I'm actually referring to is liberal talk show host / comedian Russell
Brand making that same rant against Fox News for supporting war against the Islamic
State, adding at the end that "Fox is worse than ISIS".

That ﬁts my model perfectly. You wouldn't celebrate Osama's death, only Thatcher's.
And you wouldn't call ISIS savages, only Fox News. Fox is the outgroup, ISIS is just
some random people oﬀ in a desert. You hate the outgroup, you don't hate random
desert people.
I would go further. Not only does Brand not feel much like hating ISIS, he has a strong
incentive not to. That incentive is: the Red Tribe is known to hate ISIS loudly and
conspicuously. Hating ISIS would signal Red Tribe membership, would be the
equivalent of going into Crips territory with a big Bloods gang sign tattooed on your
shoulder.
But this might be unfair. What would Russell Brand answer, if we asked him to justify
his decision to be much angrier at Fox than ISIS?
He might say something like "Obviously Fox News is not literally worse than ISIS. But
here I am, talking to my audience, who are mostly white British people and
Americans. These people already know that ISIS is bad; they don't need to be told that
any further. In fact, at this point being angry about how bad ISIS is, is less likely to
genuinely change someone's mind about ISIS, and more likely to promote
Islamophobia. The sort of people in my audience are at zero risk of becoming ISIS
supporters, but at a very real risk of Islamophobia. So ranting against ISIS would be
counterproductive and dangerous.
On the other hand, my audience of white British people and Americans is very likely to
contain many Fox News viewers and supporters. And Fox, while not quite as evil as
ISIS, is still pretty bad. So here's somewhere I have a genuine chance to reach people
at risk and change minds. Therefore, I think my decision to rant against Fox News, and
maybe hyperbolically say they were 'worse than ISIS' is justiﬁed under the
circumstances."
I have a lot of sympathy to hypothetical-Brand, especially to the part about
Islamophobia. It does seem really possible to denounce ISIS' atrocities to a population
that already hates them in order to weak-man a couple of already-marginalized
Muslims. We need to ﬁght terrorism and atrocities - therefore it's okay to shout at a
poor girl ten thousand miles from home for wearing a headscarf in public. Christians
are being executed for their faith in Sudan, therefore let's picket the people trying to
build a mosque next door.
But my sympathy with Brand ends when he acts like his audience is likely to be fans of
Fox News.
In a world where a negligible number of Redditors oppose gay marriage and 1% of
Less Wrongers identify conservative and I know 0/150 creationists, how many of the
people who visit the YouTube channel of a well-known liberal activist with a Che-
inspired banner, a channel whose episode names are things like "War: What Is It Good
For?" and "Sarah Silverman Talks Feminism" - how many of them do you think are big
Fox News fans?
In a way, Russell Brand would have been braver taking a stand against ISIS than
against Fox. If he attacked ISIS, his viewers would just be a little confused and
uncomfortable. Whereas every moment he's attacking Fox his viewers are like "HA
HA! YEAH! GET 'EM! SHOW THOSE IGNORANT BIGOTS IN THE OUTGROUP WHO'S
BOSS!"

Brand acts as if there are just these countries called "Britain" and "America" who are
receiving his material. Wrong. There are two parallel universes, and he's only
broadcasting to one of them.
The result is exactly what we predicted would happen in the case of Islam. Bombard
people with images of a far-oﬀ land they already hate and tell them to hate it more,
and the result is ramping up the intolerance on the couple of dazed and marginalized
representatives of that culture who have ended up stuck on your half of the divide.
Sure enough, if industry or culture or community gets Blue enough, Red Tribe
members start getting harassed, ﬁred from their jobs (Brendan Eich being the obvious
example) or otherwise shown the door.
Think of Brendan Eich as a member of a tiny religious minority surrounded by people
who hate that minority. Suddenly ﬁring him doesn't seem very noble.
If you mix together Podunk, Texas and Mosul, Iraq, you can prove that Muslims are
scary and very powerful people who are executing Christians all the time - and so we
have a great excuse for kicking the one remaining Muslim family, random people who
never hurt anyone, out of town.
And if you mix together the open-source tech industry and the parallel universe where
you can't wear a FreeBSD t-shirt without risking someone trying to exorcise you, you
can prove that Christians are scary and very powerful people who are persecuting
everyone else all the time, and you have a great excuse for kicking one of the few
people willing to aﬃliate with the Red Tribe, a guy who never hurt anyone, out of
town.
When a friend of mine heard Eich got ﬁred, she didn't see anything wrong with it. "I
can tolerate anything except intolerance," she said.
"Intolerance" is starting to look like another one of those words like "white" and
"American".
"I can tolerate anything except the outgroup." Doesn't sound quite so noble now, does
it?
X.
We started by asking: millions of people are conspicuously praising every outgroup
they can think of, while conspicuously condemning their own in-group. This seems
contrary to what we know about social psychology. What's up?
We noted that outgroups are rarely literally "the group most diﬀerent from you", and
in fact far more likely to be groups very similar to you sharing almost all your
characteristics and living in the same area.
We then noted that although liberals and conservatives live in the same area, they
might as well be two totally diﬀerent countries or universe as far as level of
interaction were concerned.
Contra the usual idea of them being marked only by voting behavior, we described
them as very diﬀerent tribes with totally diﬀerent cultures. You can speak of
"American culture" only in the same way you can speak of "Asian culture" - that is,
with a lot of interior boundaries being pushed under the rug.

The outgroup of the Red Tribe is occasionally blacks and gays and Muslims, more often
the Blue Tribe.
The Blue Tribe has performed some kind of very impressive act of alchemy, and
transmuted all of its outgroup hatred to the Red Tribe.
This is not surprising. Ethnic diﬀerences have proven quite tractable in the face of
shared strategic aims. Even the Nazis, not known for their ethnic tolerance, were able
to get all buddy-buddy with the Japanese when they had a common cause.
Research suggests Blue Tribe / Red Tribe prejudice to be much stronger than better-
known types of prejudice like racism. Once the Blue Tribe was able to enlist the blacks
and gays and Muslims in their ranks, they became allies of convenience who deserve
to be rehabilitated with mildly condescending paeans to their virtue. "There never was
a coward where the shamrock grows."
Spending your entire life insulting the other tribe and talking about how terrible they
are makes you look, well, tribalistic. It is deﬁnitely not high class. So when members of
the Blue Tribe decide to dedicate their entire life to yelling about how terrible the Red
Tribe is, they make sure that instead of saying "the Red Tribe", they say "America", or
"white people", or "straight white men". That way it's humble self-criticism. They are
so interested in justice that they are willing to critique their own beloved side, much
as it pains them to do so. We know they are not exaggerating, because one might
exaggerate the ﬂaws of an enemy, but that anyone would exaggerate their own ﬂaws
fails the criterion of embarrassment.
The Blue Tribe always has an excuse at hand to persecute and crush any Red Tribers
unfortunate enough to fall into its light-matter-universe by deﬁning them as all-
powerful domineering oppressors. They appeal to the fact that this is deﬁnitely the
way it works in the Red Tribe's dark-matter-universe, and that's in the same country
so it has to be the same community for all intents and purposes. As a result, every
Blue Tribe institution is permanently licensed to take whatever emergency measures
are necessary against the Red Tribe, however disturbing they might otherwise seem.
And so how virtuous, how noble the Blue Tribe! Perfectly tolerant of all of the diﬀerent
groups that just so happen to be allied with them, never intolerant unless it happen to
be against intolerance itself. Never stooping to engage in petty tribal conﬂict like that
awful Red Tribe, but always nobly criticizing their own culture and striving to make it
better!
Sorry. But I hope this is at least a little convincing. The weird dynamic of outgroup-
philia and ingroup-phobia isn't anything of the sort. It's just good old-fashioned in-
group-favoritism and outgroup bashing, a little more sophisticated and a little more
sneaky.
XI.
This essay is bad and I should feel bad.
I should feel bad because I made exactly the mistake I am trying to warn everyone
else about, and it wasn't until I was almost done that I noticed.
How virtuous, how noble I must be! Never stooping to engage in petty tribal conﬂict
like that silly Red Tribe, but always nobly criticizing my own tribe and striving to make
it better.

Yeah. Once I've written a ten thousand word essay savagely attacking the Blue Tribe,
either I'm a very special person or they're my outgroup. And I'm not that special.
Just as you can pull a fast one and look humbly self-critical if you make your audience
assume there's just one American culture, so maybe you can trick people by assuming
there's only one Blue Tribe.
I'm pretty sure I'm not Red, but I did talk about the Grey Tribe above, and I show all
the risk factors for being one of them. That means that, although my critique of the
Blue Tribe may be right or wrong, in terms of motivation it comes from the same place
as a Red Tribe member talking about how much they hate al-Qaeda or a Blue Tribe
member talking about how much they hate ignorant bigots. And when I boast of being
able to tolerate Christians and Southerners whom the Blue Tribe is mean to, I'm not
being tolerant at all, just noticing people so far away from me they wouldn't make a
good outgroup anyway.
I had fun writing this article. People do not have fun writing articles savagely criticizing
their in-group. People can criticize their in-group, it's not humanly impossible, but it
takes nerves of steel, it makes your blood boil, you should sweat blood. It shouldn't be
fun.
You can bet some white guy on Gawker who week after week churns out "Why White
People Are So Terrible" and "Here's What Dumb White People Don't Understand" is
having fun and not sweating any blood at all. He's not criticizing his in-group, he's
never even considered criticizing his in-group. I can't blame him. Criticizing the in-
group is a really diﬃcult project I've barely begun to build the mental skills necessary
to even consider.
I can think of criticisms of my own tribe. Important criticisms, true ones. But the
thought of writing them makes my blood boil.
I imagine might I feel like some liberal US Muslim leader, when he goes on the O'Reilly
Show, and O'Reilly ambushes him and demands to know why he and other American
Muslims haven't condemned beheadings by ISIS more, demands that he criticize them
right there on live TV. And you can see the wheels in the Muslim leader's head turning,
thinking something like "Okay, obviously beheadings are terrible and I hate them as
much as anyone. But you don't care even the slightest bit about the victims of
beheadings. You're just looking for a way to score points against me so you can
embarass all Muslims. And I would rather personally behead every single person in the
world than give a smug bigot like you a single microgram more stupid self-satisfaction
than you've already got."
That is how I feel when asked to criticize my own tribe, even for correct reasons. If you
think you're criticizing your own tribe, and your blood is not at that temperature,
consider the possibility that you aren't.
But if I want Self-Criticism Virtue Points, criticizing the Grey Tribe is the only honest
way to get them. And if I want Tolerance Points, my own personal cross to bear right
now is tolerating the Blue Tribe. I need to remind myself that when they are bad
people, they are merely Osama-level bad people instead of Thatcher-level bad people.
And when they are good people, they are powerful and necessary crusaders against
the evils of the world.
The worst thing that could happen to this post is to have it be used as convenient
feces to ﬂing at the Blue Tribe whenever feces are necessary. Which, given what has

happened to my last couple of posts along these lines and the obvious biases of my
own subconscious, I already expect it will be.
But the best thing that could happen to this post is that it makes a lot of people,
especially myself, ﬁgure out how to be more tolerant. Not in the "of course I'm
tolerant, why shouldn't I be?" sense of the Emperor in Part I. But in the sense of
"being tolerant makes me see red, makes me sweat blood, but darn it I am going to
be tolerant anyway."

Book Review: Albion's Seed
I.
Albion's Seed by David Fischer is a history professor's nine-hundred-page treatise on
patterns of early immigration to the Eastern United States. It's not light reading and
not the sort of thing I would normally pick up. I read it anyway on the advice of people
who kept telling me it explains everything about America. And it sort of does.
In school, we tend to think of the original American colonists as "Englishmen", a
maximally non-diverse group who form the background for all of the diversity and
ethnic conﬂict to come later. Fischer's thesis is the opposite. Diﬀerent parts of the
country were settled by very diﬀerent groups of Englishmen with diﬀerent regional
backgrounds, religions, social classes, and philosophies. The colonization process
essentially extracted a single stratum of English society, isolated it from all the others,
and then plunked it down on its own somewhere in the Eastern US.
I used to play Alpha Centauri, a computer game about the colonization of its
namesake star system. One of the dynamics that made it so interesting was its
backstory, where a Puerto Rican survivalist, an African plutocrat, and other colorful
characters organized their own colonial expeditions and competed to seize territory
and resources. You got to explore not only the settlement of a new world, but the
settlement of a new world by societies dominated by extreme founder eﬀects. What
kind of weird pathologies and wonderful innovations do you get when a group of
overly romantic Scottish environmentalists is allowed to develop on its own trajectory
free of all non-overly-romantic-Scottish-environmentalist inﬂuences? Albion's Seed
argues that this is basically the process that formed several early US states.
Fischer describes four of these migrations: the Puritans to New England in the 1620s,
the Cavaliers to Virginia in the 1640s, the Quakers to Pennsylvania in the 1670s, and
the Borderers to Appalachia in the 1700s.
II.
A: The Puritans
I hear about these people every Thanksgiving, then never think about them again for
the next 364 days. They were a Calvinist sect that dissented against the Church of
England and followed their own brand of dour, industrious, fun-hating Christianity.
Most of them were from East Anglia, the part of England just northeast of London.
They came to America partly because they felt persecuted, but mostly because they
thought England was full of sin and they were at risk of absorbing the sin by osmosis if
they didn't get away quick and build something better. They really liked "city on a hill"
metaphors.
I knew about the Mayﬂower, I knew about the black hats and silly shoes, I even knew
about the time Squanto threatened to release a bioweapon buried under Plymouth
Rock that would bring about the apocalypse. But I didn't know that the Puritan
migration to America was basically a eugenicist's wet dream.
Much like eg Unitarians today, the Puritans were a religious group that drew
disproportionately from the most educated and education-obsessed parts of the
English populace. Literacy among immigrants to Massachusetts was twice as high as

the English average, and in an age when the vast majority of Europeans were farmers
most immigrants to Massachusetts were skilled craftsmen or scholars. And the Puritan
"homeland" of East Anglia was a an unusually intellectual place, with strong
inﬂuences from Dutch and Continental trade; historian Havelock Ellis ﬁnds that it
"accounts for a much larger proportion of literary, scientiﬁc, and intellectual
achievement than any other part of England."
Furthermore, only the best Puritans were allowed to go to Massachusetts; Fischer
writes that "it may have been the only English colony that required some of its
immigrants to submit letters of recommendation" and that "those who did not ﬁt in
were banished to other colonies and sent back to England". Puritan "headhunters"
went back to England to recruit "godly men" and "honest men" who "must not be of
the poorer sort".
INTERESTING PURITAN FACTS:
1. Sir Harry Vane, who was "brieﬂy governor of Massachusetts at the age of 24", "was
so rigorous in his Puritanism that he believed only the thrice-born to be truly saved".
2. The great seal of the Massachusetts Bay Company "featured an Indian with arms
beckoning, and ﬁve English words ﬂowing from his mouth: 'Come over and help us'"
3. Northern New Jersey was settled by Puritans who named their town after the "New
Ark Of The Covenant" - modern Newark.
4. Massachusetts clergy were very powerful; Fischer records the story of a traveller
asking a man "Are you the parson who serves here?" only to be corrected "I am, sir,
the parson who rules here."
5. The Puritans tried to import African slaves, but they all died of the cold.
6. In 1639, Massachusetts declared a "Day Of Humiliation" to condemn "novelties,
oppression, atheism, excesse, superﬂuity, idleness, contempt of authority, and trouble
in other parts to be remembered"
7. The average family size in Waltham, Massachusetts in the 1730s was 9.7 children.
8. Everyone was compelled by law to live in families. Town oﬃcials would search the
town for single people and, if found, order them to join a family; if they refused, they
were sent to jail.
9. 98% of adult Puritan men were married, compared to only 73% of adult Englishmen
in general. Women were under special pressure to marry, and a Puritan proverb said
that "women dying maids lead apes in Hell".
10. 90% of Puritan names were taken from the Bible. Some Puritans took pride in their
learning by giving their children obscure Biblical names they would expect nobody
else to have heard of, like Mahershalalhasbaz. Others chose random Biblical terms
that might not have technically been intended as names; "the son of Bostonian
Samuel Pond was named Mene Mene Tekel Upharsin Pond". Still others chose Biblical
words completely at random and named their children things like Maybe or
Notwithstanding.
11. Puritan parents traditionally would send children away to be raised with other
families, and raise those families' children in turn, in the hopes that the lack of
familiarity would make the child behave better.
12. In 1692, 25% of women over age 45 in Essex County were accused of witchcraft.
13. Massachusetts passed the ﬁrst law mandating universal public education, which
was called The Old Deluder Law in honor of its preamble, which began "It being one
chief project of that old deluder, Satan, to keep men from the knowledge of the
scriptures..."
14. Massachusetts cuisine was based around "meat and vegetables submerged in
plain water and boiled relentlessly without seasonings of any kind".
15. Along with the famous scarlet A for adultery, Puritans could be forced to wear a B
for blasphemy, C for counterfeiting, D for drunkenness, and so on.

16. Wasting time in Massachusetts was literally a criminal oﬀense, listed in the law
code, and several people were in fact prosecuted for it.
17. This wasn't even the nadir of weird hard-to-enforce Massachusetts laws. Another
law just said "If any man shall exceed the bounds of moderation, we shall punish him
severely".
Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote of Massachusetts Puritanism: "The underlying foundation
of life in New England was one of profound, unutterable, and therefore unuttered
mehalncholy, which regarded human existence itself as a ghastly risk, and, in the case
of the vast majority of human beings, an inconceivable misfortune." And indeed,
everything was dour, strict, oppressive, and very religious. A typical Massachusetts
week would begin in the church, which doubled as the town meeting hall. There were
no decorations except a giant staring eye on the pulpit to remind churchgoers that
God was watching them. Townspeople would stand up before their and declare their
shame and misdeeds, sometimes being forced to literally crawl before the other
worshippers begging for forgiveness. THen the minister would give two two-hour
sermons back to back. The entire aﬀair would take up to six hours, and the church was
unheated (for some reason they stored all their gunpowder there, so no one was
allowed to light a ﬁre), and this was Massachusetts, and it was colder in those days
than it is now, so that during winter some people would literally lose ﬁngers to
frostbite (Fischer: "It was a point of honor for the minister never to shorten a sermon
merely because his audience was frozen"). Everyone would stand there with their
guns (they were legally required to bring guns, in case Indians attacked during the
sermon) and hear about how they were going to Hell, all while the giant staring eye
looked at them.
So life as a Puritan was pretty terrible. On the other hand, their society was
impressively well-ordered. Teenage pregnancy rates were the lowest in the Western
world and in some areas literally zero. Murder rates were half those in other American
colonies. There was remarkably low income inequality - "the top 10% of wealthholders
held only 20%-30% of taxable property", compared to 75% today and similar numbers
in other 17th-century civilizations. The poor (at least the poor native to a given town)
were treated with charity and respect - "in Salem, one man was ordered to be set by
the heels in the stocks for being uncharitable to a poor man in distress". Government
was conducted through town meetings in which everyone had a say. Women had more
equality than in most parts of the world, and domestic abuse was punished brutally.
The educational system was top-notch - "by most empirical tests of intellectual
eminence, New England led all other parts of British America from the 17th to the
early 20th century".
In some ways the Puritans seem to have taken the classic dystopian bargain - give up
all freedom and individuality and art, and you can have a perfect society without
crime or violence or inequality. Fischer ends each of his chapters with a discussion of
how the society thought of liberty, and the Puritans unsurprisingly thought of liberty
as "ordered liberty" - the freedom of everything to tend to its correct place and stay
there. They thought of it as a freedom from disruption - apparently FDR stole some of
his "freedom from fear" stuﬀ from early Puritan documents. They were extremely not
in favor of the sort of liberty that meant that, for example, there wouldn't be laws
against wasting time. That was going too far.
B: The Cavaliers
The Massachusetts Puritans ﬂed England in the 1620s partly because the king and
nobles were oppressing them. In the 1640s, English Puritans under Oliver Cromwell

rebelled, took over the government, and killed the king. The nobles not unreasonably
started looking to get the heck out.
Virginia had been kind of a wreck ever since most of the original Jamestown settlers
had mostly died of disease. Governor William Berkeley, a noble himself, decided the
colony could reinvent itself as a destination for refugee nobles, and told them it would
do everything possible to help them maintain the position of oppressive supremacy to
which they were accustomed. The British nobility was sold. The Cavaliers - the nobles
who had fought and lost the English Civil War - ﬂed to Virginia. Historians who cross-
checking Virginian immigrant lists against English records ﬁnd that of Virginians whose
opinions on the War were known, 98% were royalists. They were overwhelming
Anglican, mostly from agrarian southern England, and all related to each other in the
incestuous way of nobility everywhere: "it is diﬃcult to think of any ruling elite that
has been more closely interrelated since the Ptolemies". There were twelve members
of Virginia's royal council; in 1724 "all without exception were related to one another
by blood or marriage...as late as 1775, every member of that august body was
descended from a councilor who had served in 1660".
These aristocrats didn't want to do their own work, so they brought with them tens of
thousands of indentured servants; more than 75% of all Virginian immigrants arrived
in this position. Some of these people came willingly on a system where their master
paid their passage over and they would be free after a certain number of years; others
were sent by the courts as punishments; still others were just plain kidnapped. The
gender ratio was 4:1 in favor of men, and there were entire English gangs dedicated
to kidnapping women and sending them to Virginia, where they fetched a high price.
Needless to say, these people came from a very diﬀerent stratum than their masters
or the Puritans.
People who came to Virginia mostly died. They died of malaria, typhoid fever,
amoebiasis, and dysentery. Unlike in New England, where Europeans were better
adapted to the cold climate than Africans, in Virginia it was Europeans who had the
higher disease-related mortality rate. The whites who survived tended to become
"sluggish and indolent", according to the universal report of travellers and chroniclers,
although I might be sluggish and indolent too if I had been kidnapped to go work on
some rich person's farm and sluggishness/indolence was an option.
The Virginians tried their best to oppress white people. Really, they did. The depths to
which they sank in trying to oppress white people almost boggle the imagination.
There was a rule that if a female indentured servant became pregnant, a few extra
years were added on to their indenture, supposedly because they would be working
less hard during their pregnancy and child-rearing so it wasn't fair to the master.
Virginian aristocrats would rape their own female servants, then add a penalty term
on to their indenture for becoming pregnant. That is an impressive level of chutzpah.
But despite these eﬀorts, eventually all the white people either died, or became too
sluggish to be useful, or worst of all just ﬁnished up their indentures and became
legally free. The aristocrats started importing black slaves as per the model that had
sprung up in the Caribbean, and so the stage was set for the antebellum South we
read about in history classes.
INTERESTING CAVALIER FACTS:
1. Virginian cavalier speech patterns sound a lot like modern African-American
dialects. It doesn't take much imagination to ﬁgure out why, but it's strange to think
of a 17th century British lord speaking what a modern ear would clearly recognize as
Ebonics.

2. Three-quarters of 17th-century Virginian children lost at least one parent before
turning 18.
3. Cousin marriage was an important custom that helped cement bonds among the
Virginian elite, "and many an Anglican lady changed her condition but not her name".
4. In Virginia, women were sometimes unironically called "breeders"; English women
were sometimes referred to as "She-Britons".
5. Virginia didn't really have towns; the Chesapeake Bay was such a giant maze of
rivers and estuaries and waterways that there wasn't much need for land transport
hubs. Instead, the unit of settlement was the plantation, which consisted of an
aristocratic planter, his wife and family, his servants, his slaves, and a bunch of guests
who hung around and mooched oﬀ him in accordance with the ancient custom of
hospitality.
6. Virginian society considered everyone who lived in a plantation home to be a kind
of "family", with the aristocrat both as the literal father and as a sort of abstracted
patriarch with complete control over his domain.
7. Virginia governor William Berkeley probably would not be described by moderns as
'strong on education'. He said in a speech that "I thank God there are no free schools
nor printing [in Virginia], and I hope we shall not have these for a hundred years, for
learning has brought disobedience, and heresy, and sects into the world, and printing
has divuldged them, and libels against the best government. God keep us from both!"
8. Virginian recreation mostly revolved around hunting and bloodsports. Great lords
hunted deer, lesser gentry hunted foxes, indentured servants had a weird game in
which they essentially draw-and-quartered geese, young children "killed and tortured
songbirds", and "at the bottom of this hierarchy of bloody games were male infants
who prepared themselves for the larger pleasures of maturity by torturing snakes,
maiming frogs, and pulling the wings oﬀ butterﬂies. Thus, every red-blooded male in
Virginia was permitted to slaughter some animal or other, and the size of his victim
was proportioned to his social rank."
9. "In 1747, an Anglican minister named William Kay infuriated the great planter
Landon Carter by preaching a sermon against pride. The planter took it personally and
sent his [relations] and ordered them to nail up the doors and windows of all the
churches in which Kay preached."
10. Our word "condescension" comes from a ritual attitude that leading Virginians
were supposed to display to their inferiors. Originally condescension was supposed to
be a polite way of showing respect those who were socially inferior to you; our modern
use of the term probably says a lot about what Virginians actually did with it.
In a lot of ways, Virginia was the opposite of Massachusetts. Their homicide rate was
sky-high, and people were actively encouraged to respond to slights against their
honor with duels (for the rich) and violence (for the poor). They were obsessed with
gambling, and "made bets not merely on horses, cards, cockﬁghts, and backgammon,
but also on crops, prices, women, and the weather". Their cuisine focused on gigantic
sumptuous feasts of animals killed in horrible ways. There were no witchcraft trials,
but there were people who were ﬁned for disrupting the peace by accusing their
neighbors of witchcraft. Their church sermons were twenty minutes long on the dot.
The Puritans naturally thought of the Virginians as completely lawless reprobate
sinners, but this is not entirely true. Virginian church sermons might have been twenty
minutes long, but Virginian ballroom dance lessons could last nine hours. It wasn't
that the Virginians weren't bound by codes, just that those codes were social rather
than moral.
And Virginian nobles weren't just random jerks, they were carefully cultivated jerks.
Planters spared no expense to train their sons to be strong, forceful, and not take

nothin' from nobody. They would encourage and reward children for being loud and
temperamental, on the grounds that this indicated a strong personality and having a
strong personality was ﬁtting of a noble. When this worked, it worked really well -
witness natural leaders and self-driven polymaths like George Washington and
Thomas Jeﬀerson. More often it failed catastrophically - the rate of sex predation and
rape in Virginia was at least as high as anywhere else in North America.
The Virginian Cavaliers had an obsession with liberty, but needless to say it was not
exactly a sort of liberty of which the ACLU would approve. I once heard someone
argue against libertarians like so: even if the government did not infringe on liberties,
we would still be unfree for other reasons. If we had to work, we would be subject to
the whim of bosses. If we were poor, we would not be "free" to purchase most of the
things we want. In any case, we are "oppressed" by disease, famine, and many other
things besides government that prevent us from implementing our ideal existence.
The Virginians took this idea and ran with it - in the wrong direction. No, they said, we
wouldn't be free if we had to work, therefore we insist upon not working. No, we
wouldn't be free if we were limited by poverty, therefore we insist upon being
extremely rich. Needless to say, this conception of freedom required ﬁrst indentured
servitude and later slavery to make it work, but the Virginians never claimed that the
servants or slaves were free. That wasn't the point. Freedom, like wealth, was properly
distributed according to rank; nobles had as much as they wanted, the middle-class
enough to get by on, and everyone else none at all. And a Virginian noble would have
gone to his grave insisting that a civilization without slavery could never have citizens
who were truly free.
C: The Quakers
Fischer warns against the temptation to think of the Quakers as normal modern
people, but he has to warn us precisely because it's so tempting. Where the Puritans
seem like a dystopian caricature of virtue and the Cavaliers like a dystopian caricature
of vice, the Quakers just seem ordinary. Yes, they're kind of a religious cult, but
they're the kind of religious cult any of us might found if we were thrown back to the
seventeenth century.
Instead they were founded by a weaver's son named George Fox. He believed people
were basically good and had an Inner Light that connected them directly to God
without a need for priesthood, ritual, Bible study, or self-denial; mostly people just
needed to listen to their consciences and be nice. Since everyone was equal before
God, there was no point in holding up distinctions between lords and commoners:
Quakers would just address everybody as "Friend". And since the Quakers were
among the most persecuted sects at the time, they developed an insistence on
tolerance and freedom of religion which (unlike the Puritans) they stuck to even when
shifting fortunes put them on top. They believed in paciﬁcism, equality of the sexes,
racial harmony, and a bunch of other things which seem pretty hippy-ish even today
let alone in 1650.
England's top Quaker in the late 1600s was William Penn. Penn is universally known to
Americans as "that guy Pennsylvania is named after" but actually was a larger-than-
life 17th century superman. Born to the nobility, Penn distinguished himself early on
as a military oﬃcer; he was known for beating legendary duelists in single combat and
then sparing their lives with sermons about how murder was wrong. He gradually
started having mystical visions, quit the military, and converted to Quakerism. Like
many Quakers he was arrested for blasphemy; unlike many Quakers, they couldn't

make the conviction stick; in his trial he "conducted his defense so brilliantly that the
jurors refused to convict him even when threatened with prison themselves, [and] the
case became a landmark in the history of trial by jury." When the state ﬁnally found a
pretext on which to throw him in prison, he spent his incarceration composing "one of
the noblest defenses of religious liberty ever written", conducting a successful mail-
based courtship with England's most eligible noblewoman, and somehow gaining the
personal friendship and admiration of King Charles II. Upon his release the King liked
him so much that he gave him a large chunk of the Eastern United States on a ﬂimsy
pretext of repaying a family debt. Penn didn't want to name his new territory
Pennsylvania - he recommended just "Sylvania" - but everybody else overruled him
and Pennyslvania it was. The grant wasn't quite the same as the modern state, but a
chunk of land around the Delaware River Valley - what today we would call eastern
Pennsylvania, northern Delaware, southern New Jersey, and bits of Maryland -
centered on the obviously-named-by-Quakers city of Philadelphia.
Penn decided his new territory would be a Quaker refuge - his exact wording was "a
colony of Heaven [for] the children of the Light". He mandated universal religious
toleration, a total ban on military activity, and a government based on checks and
balances that would "leave myself and successors no power of doing mischief, that
the will of one man may not hinder the good of a whole country".
His recruits - about 20,000 people in total - were Quakers from the north of England,
many of them minor merchants and traders. They disproportionately included the
Britons of Norse descent common in that region, who formed a separate stratum and
had never really gotten along with the rest of the British population. They were joined
by several German sects close enough to Quakers that they felt at home there; these
became the ancestors of (among other groups) the Pennsylvania Dutch, Amish, and
Mennonites.
INTERESTING QUAKER FACTS:
1. In 1690 a gang of pirates stole a ship in Philadelphia and went up and down the
Delaware River stealing and plundering. The Quakers got in a heated (but brotherly)
debate about whether it was morally permissible to use violence to stop them. When
the government ﬁnally decided to take action, contrarian minister George Keith
dissented and caused a major schism in the faith.
2. Fischer argues that the Quaker ban on military activity within their territory would
have doomed them in most other American regions, but by extreme good luck the
Indians in the Delaware Valley were almost as peaceful as the Quakers. As usual, at
least some credit goes to William Penn, who taught himself Algonquin so he could
negotiate with the Indians in their own language.
3. The Quakers' marriage customs combined a surprisingly modern ideas of romance,
with extreme bureaucracy. The wedding process itself had sixteen stages, including
"ask parents", "ask community women", "ask community men", "community women
ask parents", and "obtain a certiﬁcate of cleanliness". William Penn's marriage
apparently had forty-six witnesses to testify to the good conduct and non-relatedness
of both parties.
4. Possibly related: 16% of Quaker women were unmarried by age 50, compared to
only about 2% of Puritans.
5. Quakers promoted gender equality, including the (at the time scandalous) custom
of allowing women to preach (condemned by the Puritans as the crime of "she-
preaching").
6. But they were such prudes about sex that even the Puritans thought they went too
far. Pennsylvania doctors had problems treating Quakers because they would
"delicately describe everything from neck to waist as their 'stomachs', and anything

from waist to feet as their 'ankles'".
7. Quaker parents Richard and Abigail Lippincott named their eight children, in order,
"Remember", "John", "Restore", "Freedom", "Increase", "Jacob", "Preserve", and
"Israel", so that their names combined formed a simple prayer.
8. Quakers had surprisingly modern ideas about parenting, basically sheltering and
spoiling their children at a time when everyone else was trying whip the Devil out of
them.
9. "A Quaker preacher, traveling in the more complaisant colony of Maryland, came
upon a party of young people who were dancing merrily together. He broke in upon
them like an avenging angel, stopped the dance, anddemanded to know if they
considered Martin Luther to be a good man. The astonished youngsters answered in
the aﬃrmative. The Quaker evangelist then quoted Luther on the subject of dancing:
'as many paces as the man takes in his dance, so many steps he takes toward Hell.
This, the Quaker missionary gloated with a gleam of sadistic satisfaction, 'spoiled their
sport'."
10. William Penn wrote about thirty books defending liberty of conscience throughout
his life. The Quaker obsession with the individual conscience as the work of God
helped invent the modern idea of conscientious objection.
11. Quakers were heavily (and uniquely for their period) opposed to animal cruelty.
When foreigners introduced bullbaiting into Philadelphia during the 1700s, the mayor
bought a ticket supposedly as a spectator. When the event was about to begin, he
leapt into the ring, personally set the bull free, and threatened to arrest anybody who
stopped him.
12. On the other hand, they were also opposed to other sports for what seem like kind
of random reasons. The town of Morley declared an anathema against foot races,
saying that they were "unfruitful works of darkness".
13. The Pennsylvania Quakers became very prosperous merchants and traders. They
also had a policy of loaning money at low- or zero- interest to other Quakers, which let
them outcompete other, less religious businesspeople.
14. They were among the ﬁrst to replace the set of bows, grovels, nods, meaningful
looks, and other British customs of acknowledging rank upon greeting with a single
rank-neutral equivalent - the handshake.
15. Pennsylvania was one of the ﬁrst polities in the western world to abolish the death
penalty.
16. The Quakers were lukewarm on education, believing that too much schooling
obscured the natural Inner Light. Fischer declares it "typical of William Penn" that he
wrote a book arguing against reading too much.
17. The Quakers not only instituted religious freedom, but made laws against mocking
another person's religion.
18. In the late 1600s as many as 70% of upper-class Quakers owned slaves, but
Pennsylvania essentially invented modern abolitionism. Although their colonial
masters in England forbade them from banning slavery outright, they applied
immense social pressure and by the mid 1700s less than 10% of the wealthy had
African slaves. As soon as the American Revolution started, forbidding slavery was one
of independent Pennsylvania's ﬁrst actions.
Pennsylvania was very successful for a while; it had some of the richest farmland in
the colonies, and the Quakers were exceptional merchants and traders; so much so
that they were forgiven their military non-intervention during the Revolution because
of their role keeping the American economy aﬂoat in the face of British sanctions.
But by 1750, the Quakers were kind of on their way out; by 1750, they were a
demographic minority in Pennsylvania, and by 1773 they were a minority in its
legislature as well. In 1750 Quakerism was the third-largest religion in the US; by 1820

it was the ninth-largest, and by 1981 it was the sixty-sixth largest. What happened?
The Quakers basically tolerated themselves out of existence. They were so welcoming
to religious minorities and immigrants that all these groups took up shop in
Pennsylvania and ended its status as a uniquely Quaker society. At the same time, the
Quakers themselves became more "fanatical" and many dropped out of politics
believing it to be too worldly a concern for them; this was obviously fatal to their
political domination. The most famous Pennsylvanian statesman of the Revolutionary
era, Benjamin Franklin, was not a Quaker at all but a ﬁrst-generation immigrant from
New England. Finally, Quakerism was naturally extra-susceptible to that thing where
Christian denominations become indistinguishable from liberal modernity and fade
into the secular background.
But Fischer argues that Quakerism continued to shape Pennsylvania long after it had
stopped being oﬃcially in charge, in much the same way that Englishmen themselves
have contributed disproportionately to American institutions even though they are
now a numerical minority. The Pennsylvanian leadership on abolitionism, penal reform,
the death penalty, and so on all happened after the colony was oﬃcially no longer
Quaker-dominated.
And it's hard not to see Quaker inﬂuence on the ideas of the modern US - which was
after all founded in Philadelphia. In the middle of the Puritans demanding strict
obedience to their dystopian hive society and the Cavaliers demanding everybody
bow down to a transplanted nobility, the Pennsylvanians - who became the thought
leaders of the Mid-Atlantic region including to a limited degree New York City - were
pretty normal and had a good opportunity to serve as power-brokers and middlemen
between the North and South. Although there are seeds of traditionally American
ideas in every region, the Quakers really stand out in terms of freedom of religion,
freedom of thought, checks and balances, and the idea of universal equality.
It occurs to me that William Penn might be literally the single most successful person
in history. He started out as a minor noble following a religious sect that everybody
despised and managed to export its principles to Pennsylvania where they ﬂourished
and multiplied. Pennsylvania then managed to export its principles to the United
States, and the United States exported them to the world. I'm not sure how much of
the suspiciously Quaker character of modern society is a direct result of William Penn,
but he was in one heck of a right place at one heck of a right time
D: The Borderers
The Borderers are usually called "the Scots-Irish", but Fischer dislikes the term
because they are neither Scots (as we usually think of Scots) nor Irish (as we usually
think of Irish). Instead, they're a bunch of people who lived on (both sides of) the
Scottish-English border in the late 1600s.
None of this makes sense without realizing that the Scottish-English border was
terrible. Every couple of years the King of England would invade Scotland or vice
versa; "from the year 1040 to 1745, every English monarch but three suﬀered a
Scottish invasion, or became an invader in his turn". These "invasions" generally
involved burning down all the border towns and killing a bunch of people there.
Eventually the two sides started getting pissed with each other and would also
torture-murder all of the enemy's citizens they could get their hands on, ie any who
were close enough to the border to reach before the enemy could send in their
armies. As if this weren't bad enough, outlaws quickly learned they could plunder one

side of the border, then escape to the other before anyone brought them to justice, so
the whole area basically became one giant cesspool of robbery and murder.
In response to these pressures, the border people militarized and stayed feudal long
past the point where the rest of the island had started modernizing. Life consisted of
farming the lands of whichever brutal warlord had the top hand today, followed by
being called to ﬁght for him on short notice, followed by a grisly death. The border
people dealt with it as best they could, and developed a culture marked by extreme
levels of clannishness, xenophobia, drunkenness, stubbornness, and violence.
By the end of the 1600s, the Scottish and English royal bloodlines had intermingled
and the two countries were drifting closer and closer to Union. The English kings
ﬁnally got some breathing room and noticed - holy frick, everything about the border
is terrible. They decided to make the region economically productive, which meant
"squeeze every cent out of the poor Borderers, in the hopes of either getting lots of
money from them or else forcing them to go elsewhere and become somebody else's
problem". Sometimes absentee landlords would just evict everyone who lived in an
entire region, en masse, replacing them with people they expected to be easier to
control.
Many of the Borderers ﬂed to Ulster in Ireland, which England was working on
colonizing as a Protestant bulwark against the Irish Catholics, and where the Crown
welcomed violent warlike people as a useful addition to their Irish-Catholic-ﬁghting
project. But Ulster had some of the same problems as the Border, and also the
Ulsterites started worrying that the Borderer cure was worse than the Irish Catholic
disease. So the Borderers started getting kicked out of Ulster too, one thing led to
another, and eventually 250,000 of these people ended up in America.
250,000 people is a lot of Borderers. By contrast, the great Puritan emigration wave
was only 20,000 or so people; even the mighty colony of Virginia only had about
50,000 original settlers. So these people showed up on the door of the American
colonies, and the American colonies collectively took one look at them and said
"nope".
Except, of course, the Quakers. The Quakers talked among themselves and decided
that these people were also Children Of God, and so they should demonstrate
Brotherly Love by taking them in. They tried that for a couple of years, and then they
questioned their life choices and also said "nope", and they told the Borderers that
Philadelphia and the Delaware Valley were actually kind of full right now but there was
lots of unoccupied land in Western Pennsylvania, and the Appalachian Mountains were
very pretty at this time of year, so why didn't they head out that way as fast as it was
physically possible to go?
At the time, the Appalachians were kind of the booby prize of American colonization:
hard to farm, hard to travel through, and exposed to hostile Indians. The Borderers fell
in love with them. They came from a pretty marginal and unproductive territory
themselves, and the Appalachians were far away from everybody and full of fun
Indians to ﬁght. Soon the Appalachian strategy became the accepted response to
Borderer immigration and was taken up from Pennsylvania in the north to the
Carolinas in the South (a few New Englanders hit on a similar idea and sent their own
Borderers to colonize the mountains of New Hampshire).
So the Borderers all went to Appalachia and established their own little rural clans
there and nothing at all went wrong except for the entire rest of American history.

INTERESTING BORDERER FACTS:
1. Colonial opinion on the Borderers diﬀered within a very narrow range: one
Pennsylvanian writer called them "the scum of two nations", another Anglican
clergyman called them "the scum of the universe".
2. Some Borderers tried to come to America as indentured servants, but after
Virginian planters got some experience with Borderers they refused to accept any
more.
3. The Borderers were mostly Presbyterians, and their arrival en masse started a race
among the established American denominations to convert them. This was mostly
unsuccessful; Anglican preacher Charles Woodmason, an important source for
information about the early Borderers, said that during his missionary activity the
Borderers "disrupted his service, rioted while he preached, started a pack of dogs
ﬁghting outside the church, loosed his horse, stole his church key, refused him food
and shelter, and gave two barrels of whiskey to his congregation before a service of
communion".
4. Borderer town-naming policy was very diﬀerent from the Biblical names of the
Puritans or the Ye Olde English names of the Virginians. Early Borderer settlements
include - just to stick to the creek-related ones - Lousy Creek, Naked Creek,
Shitbritches Creek, Cuckold's Creek, Bloodrun Creek, Pinchgut Creek, Whipping Creek,
and Hangover Creek. There were also Whiskey Springs, Hell's Half Acre, Scream Ridge,
Scuﬄetown, and Grabtown. The overall aesthetic honestly sounds a bit Orcish.
5. One of the ﬁrst Borderer leaders was John Houston. On the ship over to America,
the crew tried to steal some of his possessions; Houston retaliated by leading a
mutiny of the passengers, stealing the ship, and sailing it to America himself. He
settled in West Virginia; one of his descendants was famous Texan Sam Houston.
6. Traditional Borderer prayer: "Lord, grant that I may always be right, for thou
knowest I am hard to turn."
7. "The backcountry folk bragged that one interior county of North Carolina had so
little 'larnin' that the only literate inhabitant was elected 'county reader'"
8. The Borderer accent contained English, Scottish, and Irish elements, and is
(uncoincidentally) very similar to the typical "country western singer" accent of today.
9. The Borderers were famous for family feuds in England, including the Johnson
clan's habit of "adorning their houses with the ﬂayed skins of their enemies the
Maxwells in a blood feud that continued for many generations". The great family feuds
of the United States, like the Hatﬁeld-McCoy feud, are a direct descendent of this
tradition.
10. Within-clan marriage was a popular Borderer tradition both in England and
Appalachia; "in the Cumbrian parish of Hawkshead, for example, both the bride and
the groom bore the same last names in 25 percent of all marriages from 1568 to
1704". This led to the modern stereotype of Appalachians as inbred and incestuous.
11. The Borderers were extremely patriarchal and anti-women's-rights to a degree
that appalled even the people of the 1700s.
12. "In the year 1767, [Anglican priest] Charles Woodmason calculated that 94
percent of backcountry brides whom he had married in the past year were pregnant
on their wedding day"
13. Although the Borderers started oﬀ Presbyterian, they were in constant religious
churn and their territories were full of revivals, camp meetings, born-again
evangelicalism, and itinerant preachers. Eventually most of them ended up as what
we now call Southern Baptist.
14. Borderer folk beliefs: "If an old woman has only one tooth, she is a witch", "If you
are awake at eleven, you will see witches", "The howling of dogs shows the presence
of witches", "If your shoestring comes untied, witches are after you", "If a warm
current of air is felt, witches are passing". Also, "wet a rag in your enemy's blood, put
it behind a rock in the chimney, and when it rots your enemy will die"; apparently it

was not a coincidence they were thinking about witches so much.
15. Borderer medical beliefs: "A cure for homesickness is to sew a good charge of
gunpowder on the inside of ths shirt near the neck". That'll cure homesickness, all
right.
16. More Borderer medical beliefs: "For fever, cut a black chicken open while alive and
bind it to the bottom of your foot", "Eating the brain of a screech owl is the only
dependable remedy for headache", "For rheumatism, apply split frogs to the feet", "To
reduce a swollen leg, split a live cat and apply while still warm", "Bite the head oﬀ the
ﬁrst butterﬂy you see and you will get a new dress", "Open the cow's mouth and
throw a live toad-frog down her throat. This will cure her of hollow-horn". Also,
blacksmiths protected themselves from witches by occasionally throwing live puppies
into their furnaces.
17. Rates of public schooling in the backcountry settled by the Borderers were "the
lowest in British North America" and sometimes involved rituals like "barring out",
where the children would physically keep the teacher out of the school until he gave in
and granted the students the day oﬀ.
18. "Appalachia's idea of a moderate drinker was the mountain man who limited
himself to a single quart [of whiskey] at a sitting, explaining that more 'might ﬂy to
my head'. Other beverages were regarded with contempt."
19. A traditional backcountry sport was "rough and tumble", a no-holds-barred form of
wrestling where gouging out your opponent's eyes was considered perfectly
acceptable and in fact sound strategy. In 1772 Virginia had to pass a law against
"gouging, plucking, or putting out an eye", but this was the Cavalier-dominated
legislature all the way on the east coast and nobody in the backcountry paid them any
attention. Other traditional backcountry sports were sharpshooting and hunting.
20. The American custom of shooting guns into the air to celebrate holidays is 100%
Borderer in origin.
21. The justice system of the backcountry was heavy on lynching, originally a race-
neutral practice and named after western Virginian settler William Lynch.
22. Scottish Presbyterians used to wear red cloth around their neck to symbolize their
religion; other Englishmen nicknamed them "rednecks". This may be the origin of the
popular slur against Americans of Borderer descent, although many other etiologies
have been proposed. "Cracker" as a slur is attested as early as 1766 by a colonist who
says the term describes backcountry men who are great boasters; other proposed
etymologies like slaves talking about "whip-crackers" seem to be spurious.
This is not to paint the Borderers as universally poor and dumb - like every group,
they had an elite, and some of their elite went on to become some of America's most
important historical ﬁgures. Andrew Jackson became the ﬁrst Borderer president,
behaving exactly as you would expect the ﬁrst Borderer president to behave, and he
was followed by almost a dozen others. Borderers have also been overrepresented in
America's great military leaders, from Ulysses Grant through Teddy Roosevelt (3/4
Borderer despite his Dutch surname) to George Patton to John McCain.
The Borderers really liked America - unsurprising given where they came from - and
started identifying as American earlier and more ﬁercely than any of the other settlers
who had come before. Unsurprisingly, they strongly supported the Revolution - Patrick
Henry ("Give me liberty or give me death!") was a Borderer. They also also played a
disproportionate role in westward expansion. After the Revolution, America made an
almost literal 180 degree turn and the "backcountry" became the "frontier". It was the
Borderers who were happiest going oﬀ into the wilderness and ﬁghting Indians, and
most of the famous frontiersmen like Davy Crockett were of their number. This was a
big part of the reason the Wild West was so wild compared to, say, Minnesota (also a

frontier inhabited by lots of Indians, but settled by Northerners and Germans) and why
it inherited seemingly Gaelic traditions like cattle rustling.
Their conception of liberty has also survived and shaped modern American politics: it
seems essentially to be the modern libertarian/Republican version of freedom from
government interference, especially if phrased as "get the hell oﬀ my land", and
especially especially if phrased that way through clenched teeth while pointing a
shotgun at the oﬀending party.
III.
This is all interesting as history and doubly interesting as anthropology, but what
relevance does it have for later American history and the present day?
One of my reasons reading this book was to see whether the link between Americans'
political opinions and a bunch of their other cultural/religious/social traits (a "Blue
Tribe" and "Red Tribe") was related to the immigration patterns it describes. I'm
leaning towards "probably", but there's a lot of work to be done in explaining how the
split among these four cultures led to a split among two cultures in the modern day,
and with little help from the book itself I am going to have to resort to total unfounded
speculation. But the simplest explanation - that the Puritans and Quakers merged into
one group ("progressives", "Blue Tribe", "educated coastal elites") and the Virginians
and Borderers into another ("conservatives", "Red Tribe", "rednecks") - has a lot going
for it.
Many conservatives I read like to push the theory that modern progressivism is
descended from the utopian Protestant experiments of early America - Puritanism and
Quakerism - and that the civil war represents "Massachusetts' conquest of America". I
always found this lacking in rigor: Puritanism and Quakerism are suﬃciently diﬀerent
that positing a combination of them probably needs more intellectual work than just
gesturing at "you know, that Puritan/Quaker thing". But the idea of a Puritan New
England and a Quaker-(ish) Pennsylvania gradually blending together into a generic
"North" seems plausible, especially given the high levels of interbreeding between the
two (some of our more progressive Presidents, including Abraham Lincoln, were
literally half-Puritan and half-Quaker). Such a merge would combine the Puritan
emphasis on moral reform, education, and a well-ordered society with the Quaker
doctrine of niceness, tolerance, religious pluralism, individual conscience, and the
Inner Light. It seems kind of unfair to just mix-and-match the most modern elements
of each and declare that this proves they caused modernity, but there's no reason
that couldn't have happened.
The idea of Cavaliers and Borderers combining to form modern conservativism is
buoyed by modern conservativism's obvious Border inﬂuences, but complicated by its
lack of much that is recognizably Cavalier - the Republican Party is hardly marked by
its support for a hereditary aristocracy of gentlemen. Here I have to admit that I don't
know as much about Southern history as I'd like. In particular, how were places like
Alabama, Mississippi, et cetera settled? Most sources I can ﬁnd suggest they were set
up along the Virginia model of plantation-owning aristocrats, but if that's true how did
the modern populations come to so embody Fischer's description of Borderers? In
particular, why are they so Southern Baptist and not very Anglican? And what
happened to all of those indentured servants the Cavaliers brought over after slavery
put them out of business? What happened to that whole culture after the Civil War
destroyed the plantation system? My guess is going to be that the indentured
servants and the Borderer population mixed pretty thoroughly, and that this stratum

was hanging around providing a majority of the white bodies in the South while the
plantation owners were hogging the limelight - but I just don't know.
A quick argument that I'm not totally making all of this up:
This is a map of voting patterns by county in the 2012 Presidential election. The blue
areas in the South carefully track the so-called "black belt" of majority African-
American areas. The ones in the Midwest are mostly big cities. Aside from those, the
only people who vote Democrat are New England (very solidly!) and the Delaware
Valley region of Pennsylvania. In fact, you can easily see the distinction between the
Delaware Valley settled by Quakers in the east, and the backcountry area settled by
Borderers in the west. Even the book's footnote about how a few Borderers settled in
the mountains of New Hampshire is associated with a few spots of red in the
mountains of New Hampshire ruining an otherwise near-perfect Democratic sweep of
the north.
One anomaly in this story is a kind of linear distribution of blue across southern
Michigan, too big to be explained solely by the blacks of Detroit. But a quick look at
Wikipedia's History of Michigan ﬁnds:
In the 1820s and 1830s migrants from New England began moving to what is now
Michigan in large numbers (though there was a trickle of New England settlers
who arrived before this date). These were "Yankee" settlers, that is to say they
were descended from the English Puritans who settled New England during the
colonial era....Due to the prevalence of New Englanders and New England
transplants from upstate New York, Michigan was very culturally contiguous with
early New England culture for much of its early history...The amount with which
the New England Yankee population predominated made Michigan unique among
frontier states in the antebellum period. Due to this heritage Michigan was on the
forefront of the antislavery crusade and reforms during the 1840s and 1850s.
Alhough I can't ﬁnd proof of this speciﬁcally, I know that Michigan was settled from
the south up, and I suspect that these New England settlers concentrated in the
southern regions and that the north was settled by a more diverse group of whites
who lacked the New England connection.
Here's something else cool. We can't track Borderers directly because there's no
"Borderer" or "Scots-Irish" option on the US census. But Albion's Seed points out that
the Borderers were uniquely likely to identify as just "American" and deliberately
forgot their past ancestry as fast as they could. Meanwhile, when the census asks an
ethnicity question about where your ancestors came from, every year some people
will stubbornly ignore the point of the question and put down "America" (no, this does
not track the distribution of Native American population). Here's a map of so-called
"unhyphenated Americans", taken from this site:
We see a strong focus on the Appalachian Mountains, especially West Virginia,
Tennesee, and Kentucky, bleeding into the rest of the South. Aside from west
Pennsylvania, this is very close to where we would expect to ﬁnd the Borderers. Could
these be the same groups?

Meanwhile, here is a map of where Obama underperformed the usual Democratic vote
worst in 2008:
These maps are small and lossy, and surely unhyphenatedness is not an exact proxy
for Border ancestry - but they are nevertheless intriguing. You may also be interested
in the Washington Post's correlation between distribution of unhyphenated Americans
and Trump voters, or the Atlantic's article on Trump and Borderers.
If I'm going to map these cultural aﬃliations to ancestry, do I have to walk back on my
previous theory that they are related to class? Maybe I should. But I also think we can
posit complicated interactions between these ideas. Consider for example the
interaction between race and class; a black person with a white-sounding name, who
speaks with a white-sounding accent, and who adopts white culture (eg listens to
classical music, wears business suits) is far more likely to seem upper-class than a
black person with a black-sounding name, a black accent, and black cultural
preferences; a white person who seems black in some way (listens to hip-hop, wears
baggy clothes) is more likely to seem lower-class. This doesn't mean race and class
are exactly the same thing, but it does mean that some races get stereotyped as
upper-class and others as lower-class, and that people's racial identiﬁers may change
based on where they are in the class structure.
I think something similar is probably going on with these forms of ancestry. The
education system is probably dominated by descendents of New Englanders and
Pennsylvanians; they had an opportunity to inﬂuence the culture of academia and the
educated classes more generally, they took it, and now anybody of any background
who makes it into that world is going to be socialized according to their rules.
Likewise, people in poorer and more rural environments will be surrounded by people
of Borderer ancestry and acculturated by Borderer cultural products and end up a little
more like that group. As a result, ethnic markers have turned into and merged with
class markers in complicated ways.
Indeed, some kind of acculturation process has to have been going on, since most of
the people in these areas today are not the descendents of the original settlers. But
such a process seems very likely. Just to take an example, most of the Jews I know
(including my own family) came into the country via New York, live somewhere on the
coast, and have very Blue Tribe values. But Southern Jews believed in the Confederacy
as strongly as any Virginian - see for example Judah Benjamin. And Barry Goldwater, a
half-Jew raised in Arizona, invented the modern version of conservativism that seems
closest to some Borderer beliefs.
All of this is very speculative, with some obvious ﬂaws. What do we make of other
countries like Britain or Germany with superﬁcially similar splits but very diﬀerent
histories? Why should Puritans lose their religion and sexual prudery, but keep their
interest in moralistic reform? There are whole heaps of questions like these. But look.
Before I had any idea about any of this, I wrote that American society seems divided
into two strata, one of which is marked by emphasis on education, interest in moral
reforms, racial tolerance, low teenage pregnancy, academic/ﬁnancial jobs, and
Democratic party aﬃliation, and furthermore that this group was centered in the
North. Meanwhile, now I learn that the North was settled by two groups that when
combined have emphasis on education, interest in moral reforms, racial tolerance, low
teenage pregnancy, an academic and mercantile history, and were the heartland of
the historical Whigs and Republicans who preceded the modern Democratic Party.

And I wrote about another stratum centered in the South marked by poor education,
gun culture, culture of violence, xenophobia, high teenage pregnancy, militarism,
patriotism, country western music, and support for the Republican Party. And now I
learn that the South was settled by a group noted even in the 1700s for its poor
education, gun culture, culture of violence, xenophobia, high premarital pregnancy,
militarism, patriotism, accent exactly like the modern country western accent, and
support for the Democratic-Republicans who preceded the modern Republican Party.
If this is true, I think it paints a very pessimistic world-view. The "iceberg model" of
culture argues that apart from the surface cultural features we all recognize like
language, clothing, and food, there are deeper levels of culture that determine the
features and institutions of a people: whether they are progressive or traditional,
peaceful or warlike, mercantile or self-contained. We grudgingly acknowledge these
features when we admit that maybe making the Middle East exactly like America in
every way is more of a long-term project than something that will happen as soon as
we kick out the latest dictator and get treated as liberators. Part of us may still want
to believe that pure reason is the universal solvent, that those Afghans will come
around once they realize that being a secular liberal democracy is obviously great. But
we keep having deep culture shoved in our face again and again, and we don't know
how to get rid of it. This has led to reasonable speculation that some aspects of it
might even be genetic - something which would explain a lot, though not its ability to
acculturate recent arrivals.
This is a hard pill to swallow even when we're talking about Afghanistan. But it
becomes doubly unpleasant when we think about it in the sense of our neighbors and
fellow citizens in a modern democracy. What, after all, is the point? A democracy
made up of 49% extremely liberal Americans and 51% fundamentalist Taliban Afghans
would be something very diﬀerent from the democratic ideal; even if occasionally a
super-charismatic American candidate could win over enough marginal Afghans to
take power, there's none of the give-and-take, none of the competition within the
marketplace of ideas, that makes democracy so attractive. Just two groups competing
to dominate one another, with the fact that the competition is peaceful being at best a
consolation prize.
If America is best explained as a Puritan-Quaker culture locked in a death-match with
a Cavalier-Borderer culture, with all of the appeals to freedom and equality and order
and justice being just so many epiphenomena - well, I'm not sure what to do with that
information. Push it under the rug? Say "Well, my culture is better, so I intend to do as
good a job dominating yours as possible?" Agree that We Are Very Diﬀerent Yet In The
End All The Same And So Must Seek Common Ground? Start researching genetic
engineering? Maybe secede? I'm not a Trump fan much more than I'm an Osama bin
Laden fan; if somehow Osama ended up being elected President, should I start
thinking "Maybe that time we made a country that was 49% people like me and 51%
members of the Taliban - maybe that was a bad idea".
I don't know. But I highly recommend Albion's Seed as an entertaining and
enlightening work of historical scholarship which will be absolutely delightful if you
don't fret too much over all of the existential questions it raises.


Albion's Seed, Genotyped
Last year I reviewed Albion's Seed, historian David Fischer's work on the four great
English migrations to America (and JayMan continues the story in his series on
American Nations). These early migrations help explain modern regional patterns like
why Massachusetts is so liberal or why Appalachia seems so backwards. As always,
there's the lingering question of how much of these patterns are cultural versus
genetic versus gene-cultural interaction.
Now Han et al take this ﬁeld high-tech with the publication of Clustering Of 770,000
Genomes Reveals Post-Colonial Population Structure Of North America (h/t gwern,
werttrew)
The team looked at 770,000 genomes analyzed by the AncestryDNA company and
used a technique called identity-by-descent to ﬁnd recent common ancestors. Then
they used some other techniques to divide them into natural clusters. This is what
they got:
This is the European-settler-focused map - there's another one focusing on immigrant
groups lower down here
This is kind of beautiful. While not exactly matching Albion's Seed, it at least clearly
shows its New Englander and Pennsylvania Quaker migrations (more realistically the
Germans who came along with the Quakers), with less distinct signals for Borderers
and Virginians. It shows how they spread directly west from their place of origin in
almost exactly the way American Nations predicted. It even conﬁrms my own
conjecture that the belt of Democrat voters along southern Michigan corresponds to
an area of New Englander settlement there (see part III here, or search "linear
distribution of blue"). And it conﬁrms Razib Khan's observation that the Mormons are
just displaced New Englanders and that their various unusual demographic features
make sense in that context.
My biggest confusion is in the Southern/Appalachian region. I think Fischer would have
predicted two distinct strains: a Tidewater/Virginian population along the coasts, and a
Borderer/Appalachian population centered in West Virginia and Kentucky. Instead there
are three populations, all of which start along the Atlantic Coast and continue inland in
about the same way. Assuming red/"Appalachian" is the Borderers, I don't know if
Fischer has a good explanation for the purple/"upland south" vs. gold/"lower south"
distinction. Nor I do get understand why, if one of those two represent the Tidewater
Virginians, they don't seem to be in the Tidewater Virginia region (which here is
inhabited mostly by Borderers). Maybe this has something to do with the Civil War, or
with the growth of the DC suburbs?
(And I guess we still haven't ruled out the maximally boring explanation that
interbreeding is entirely geographic and north-south is a bigger distinction than east-
west so we're just seeing the country divided into ﬁve equal-sized latitudinal bands.)
Not exactly a confusion, but more a disappointment: this map doesn't provide the
conﬁrmation I'd hoped for that Californians, Seattleites, and other "Left Coasters" are
displaced New Englanders - which would complete the circle of "Liberal Democrats =
Puritan/Quaker population subgroup". It's also disappointing how little data they have

for the Mountain West in general; I don't know if that's because there weren't enough
people there to show up, or because they're a mix of every genetic lineage and don't
ﬁt into any of the clusters nicely.
Still, I ﬁnd this a really elegant example of hard science conﬁrming historical
speculation. Thanks to everyone who brought it to my attention.
[EDIT: Jayman goes much more into depth on this]

Society Is Fixed, Biology Is Mutable
Today during an otherwise terrible lecture on ADHD I realized something important we
get sort of backwards.
There's this stereotype that the Left believes that human characteristics are socially
determined, and therefore mutable. And social problems are easy to ﬁx, through
things like education and social services and public awareness campaigns and "calling
people out", and so we have a responsiblity to ﬁx them, thus radically improving
society and making life better for everyone.
But the Right (by now I guess the far right) believes human characteristics are
biologically determined, and biology is ﬁxed. Therefore we shouldn't bother trying to
improve things, and any attempt is just utopianism or "immanentizing the eschaton"
or a shady justiﬁcation for tyranny and busybodyness.
And I think I reject this whole premise.
See, my terrible lecture on ADHD suggested several reasons for the increasing
prevalence of the disease. Of these I remember two: the spiritual desert of modern
adolescence, and insuﬃcient iron in the diet. And I remember thinking "Man, I hope
it's the iron one, because that seems a lot easier to ﬁx."
Society is really hard to change. We ﬁgured drug use was "just" a social problem, and
it's obvious how to solve social problems, so we gave kids nice little lessons in school
about how you should Just Say No. There were advertisements in sports and video
games about how Winners Don't Do Drugs. And just in case that didn't work, the
cherry on the social engineering sundae was putting all the drug users in jail, where
they would have a lot of time to think about what they'd done and be so moved by the
prospect of further punishment that they would come clean.
And that is why, even to this day, nobody uses drugs.
On the other hand, biology is gratifyingly easy to change. Sometimes it's just giving
people more iron supplements. But the best example is lead. Banning lead was
probably kind of controversial at the time, but in the end some reﬁneries probably had
to change their reﬁning process and some gas stations had to put up "UNLEADED"
signs and then we were done. And crime dropped like ﬁfty percent in a couple of
decades - including many forms of drug abuse.
Saying "Tendency toward drug abuse is primarily determined by ﬁxed brain structure"
sounds callous, like you're abandoning drug abusers to die. But maybe it means you
can ﬁght the problem head-on instead of forcing kids to attend more and more useless
classes where cartoon animals sing about how happy they are not using cocaine.
What about obesity? We put a lot of social eﬀort into ﬁghting obesity: labeling foods,
banning soda machines from school, banning large sodas from New York, programs in
schools to promote healthy eating, doctors chewing people out when they gain
weight, the profusion of gyms and Weight Watchers programs, and let's not forget a
level of stigma against obese people so strong that I am constantly having to deal
with their weight-related suicide attempts. As a result, everyone...keeps gaining
weight at exactly the same rate they have been for the past couple decades. Wouldn't

it be nice if increasing obesity was driven at least in part by changes in the intestinal
microbiota that we could reverse through careful antibiotic use? Or by trans-fats?
What about poor school performance? From the social angle, we try No Child Left
Behind, Common Core Curriculum, stronger teachers' unions, weaker teachers'
unions, more pay for teachers, less pay for teachers, more prayer in school, banning
prayer in school, condemning racism, condemning racism even more, et cetera. But
the poorest ﬁfth or so of kids show spectacular cognitive gains from multivitamin
supplementation, and doctors continue to tell everyone schools should start later so
children can get enough sleep and continue to be totally ignored despite strong
evidence in favor.
Even the most politically radioactive biological explanation - genetics - doesn't seem
that scary to me. The more things turn out to be genetic, the more I support universal
funding for implantable contraception that allow people to choose when they do or
don't want children - thus breaking the cycle where people too impulsive or confused
to use contraception have more children and increase frequency of those undesirable
genes. I think I'd have a heck of a lot easier a time changing gene frequency in the
population than you would changing people's locus of control or self-eﬃcacy or
whatever, even if I wasn't allowed to do anything immoral (except by very silly
religious standards of "immoral").
I'm not saying that all problems are purely biological and none are social. But I do
worry there's a consensus that biological things are unﬁxable but social things are
easy - or that social solutions are morally unambiguous but biological solutions
necessarily monstrous - and so for any given biological/social breakdown of a
problem, we ﬁgure we might as well put all our resources into attacking the more
tractable social side and dismiss the biological side. I think there's a sense in which
that's backwards, and in which it's possible to marry scientiﬁc rigor with human
compassion for the evils of the world.

A Philosopher Walks Into A Coﬀee
Shop
I have been really enjoying literarystarbucks.tumblr.com, which publishes complicated
jokes about what famous authors and ﬁctional characters order at Starbucks. I like it
so much I wish I knew more great literature, so I could get more of the jokes.
Since the creators seem to be restricting themselves to the literary world, I hope they
won't mind if I fail to resist the temptation to steal their technique for my own ﬁeld of
interest. Disclaimer: two of these are widely-known philosophy jokes and not original
to me.
* * *
Parmenides goes up to the counter. "Same as always?" asks the barista. Parmenides
nods.
* * *
Pythagoras goes up to the counter and orders a caﬀe Americano. "Mmmmm," he
says, tasting it. "How do you guys make such good coﬀee?" "It's made from the
freshest beans," the barista answers. Pythagoras screams and runs out of the store.
* * *
Thales goes up to the counter, says he's trying to break his caﬀeine habit, and orders
a decaf. The barista hands it to him. He takes a sip and spits it out. "Yuck!" he says.
"What is this, water?"
* * *
Gottfried Leibniz goes up to the counter and orders a muﬃn. The barista says he's
lucky since there is only one muﬃn left. Isaac Newton shoves his way up to the
counter, saying Leibniz cut in line and he was ﬁrst. Leibniz insists that he was ﬁrst.
The two of them come to blows.
* * *
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel goes up to the counter and gives a tremendously long
custom order in German, specifying exactly how much of each sort of syrup he wants,
various espresso shots, cream in exactly the right pattern, and a bunch of toppings, all
added in a speciﬁc order at a speciﬁc temperature. The barista can't follow him, so
just gives up and hands him a small plain coﬀee. He walks away. The people behind
him in line are very impressed with his apparent expertise, and they all order the
same thing Hegel got. The barista gives each of them a small plain coﬀee, and they all
remark on how delicious it tastes and what a remarkable coﬀee connoisseur that
Hegel is. "The Hegel" becomes a new Starbucks special and is wildly popular for the
next seventy years.
* * *

Socrates goes up to the counter. "What would you like?" asks the barista. "What
would you recommend?" asks Socrates. "I would go with the pumpkin spice latte,"
says the barista. "Why?" asks Socrates. "It's seasonal," she answers. "But why exactly
is a seasonal drink better than a non-seasonal drink?" "Well," said the barista, "I
guess it helps to connect you to the rhythm of the changing seasons." "But do you do
other things to connect yourself to that rhythm?" asked Socrates. "Like wear seasonal
clothing? Or read seasonal books? If not, how come it's only drinks that are seasonal?"
"I'm not sure," says the barista. "Think about it," says Socrates, and leaves without
getting anything.
* * *
Rene Descartes goes up to the counter. "I'll have a scone," he says. "Would you like
juice with that?" asks the barista. "I think not," says Descartes, and he ceases to
exist.
* * *
Jean-Paul Sartre goes up to the counter. "What do you want?" asks the barista. Sartre
thinks for a long while. "What do? I want?" he asks, and wanders oﬀ with a dazed look
on his face.
* * *
William of Occam goes up to the counter. He orders a coﬀee.
* * *
Adam Smith goes up to the counter. "I'll have a muﬃn," he says. "Sorry," says the
barista, "but those two are ﬁghting over the last muﬃn." She points to Leibniz and
Newton, who are still beating each other up. "I'll pay $2 more than the sticker price,
and you can keep the extra," says Smith. The barista hands him the muﬃn.
* * *
John Buridan goes up to the counter and stares at the menu indecisively.
* * *
Ludwig Wittgenstein goes up to the counter. "I'll have a small toﬀee mocha," he says.
"We don't have small," says the barista. "Then what sizes do you have?" "Just tall,
grande, and venti." "Then doesn't that make 'tall' a 'small'?" "We call it tall," says the
barista. Wittgenstein pounds his ﬁst on the counter. "Tall has no meaning separate
from the way it is used! You are just playing meaningless language games!" He storms
out in a huﬀ.
* * *
St. Anselm goes up to the counter and considers the greatest coﬀee of which it is
possible to conceive. Since existence is more perfect than nonexistence, the coﬀee
must exist. He brings it back to his table and drinks it.
* * *
Ayn Rand goes up to the counter. "What do you want?" asks the barista. "Exactly the
relevant question. As a rational human being, it is my desires that are paramount.

Since as a reasoning animal I have the power to choose, and since I am not bound by
any demand to subordinate my desires to that of an outside party who wishes to use
force or guilt to make me sacriﬁce my values to their values or to the values of some
purely hypothetical collective, it is what I want that is imperative in this transaction.
However, since I am dealing with you, and you are also a rational human being, under
capitalism we have an opportunity to mutually satisfy our values in a way that leaves
both of us richer and more fully human. You participate in the project of aﬃrming my
values by providing me with the coﬀee I want, and by paying you I am not only
incentivizing you for the transaction, but giving you a chance to excel as a human
being in the ﬁeld of producing coﬀee. You do not produce the coﬀee because I am
demanding it, or because I will use force against you if you do not, but because it
most thoroughly represents your own values, particularly the value of creation. You
would not make this coﬀee for me if it did not serve you in some way, and therefore
by satisfying my desires you also reaﬃrm yourself. Insofar as you make inferior coﬀee,
I will reject it and you will go bankrupt, but insofar as your coﬀee is truly excellent, a
reﬂection of the excellence in your own soul and your achievement as a rationalist
being, it will attract more people to your store, you will gain wealth, and you will be
able to use that wealth further in pursuit of excellence as you, rather than some
bureaucracy or collective, understand it. That is what it truly means to be a superior
human." "Okay, but what do you want?" asks the barista. "Really I just wanted to give
that speech," Rand says, and leaves.
* * *
Voltaire goes up to the counter and orders an espresso. He takes it and goes to his
seat. The barista politely reminds him he has not yet paid. Voltaire stays seated,
saying "I believe in freedom of espresso."
* * *
Thomas Malthus goes up to the counter and orders a muﬃn. The barista tells him
somebody just took the last one. Malthus grumbles that the Starbucks is getting too
crowded and there's never enough food for everybody.
* * *
Immanuel Kant goes up to the counter at exactly 8:14 AM. The barista has just
ﬁnished making his iced cinnamon dolce latte, and hands it to him. He sips it for eight
minutes and thirty seconds, then walks out the door.
* * *
Bertrand Russell goes up to the counter and orders the Hegel. He takes one sip, then
exclaims "This just tastes like plain coﬀee! Why is everyone making such a big deal
over it?"
* * *
Pierre Proudhon goes up to the counter and orders a Tazo Green Tea with toﬀee nut
syrup, two espresso shots, and pumpkin spice mixed in. The barista warns him that
this will taste terrible. "Pfah!" scoﬀs Proudhon. "Proper tea is theft!"
* * *

Sigmund Freud goes up to the counter. "I'll have ass sex, presto," he says. "What?!"
asks the barista. "I said I'll have iced espresso." "Oh," said the barista. "For a moment
I misheard you." "Yeah," Freud tells her. "I fucked my mother. People say that."
"WHAT?!" asks the barista. "I said, all of the time other people say that."
* * *
Jeremy Bentham goes up to the counter, holding a $50 bill. "What's the cheapest
drink you have?" he asks. "That would be our decaf roast, for only $1.99," says the
barista. "Good," says Bentham and hands her the $50. "I'll buy those for the next
twenty-ﬁve people who show up."
* * *
Patricia Churchland walks up to the counter and orders a latte. She sits down at a
table and sips it. "Are you enjoying your beverage?" the barista asks. "No," says
Churchland.
* * *
Friedrich Nietzsche goes up to the counter. "I'll have a scone," he says. "Would you
like juice with that?" asks the barista. "No, I hate juice," says Nietzsche. The barista
misinterprets him as saying "I hate Jews", so she kills all the Jews in Europe.

The Witching Hour
On an ordinary evening, Tal Aivon was lively and pleasant. The collection of
longhouses and yurts within its tall brick walls shone bright with kerosene - not just
torches, real kerosene - and its communal meeting area was noisy with conversation
and song. The children would be playing their games, and on the eves of holy days
the Lorekeepers would chant their stories of the Lost World, accompanied by lyres and
the town's one decaying gyitar.
Tonight, though, a pall lay on Tal Aivon. The six gates of its tall brick walls were barred
and shut, and foreboding warriors dressed in odd combinations of Kevlar and steel
armor stood just within them, brandishing their swords. Families locked themselves in
their yurts and longhouses, huddled around little kerosene lanterns. In the temple, the
priests knelt before the stone idols of St. Christ and St. Mahomet, chanting plaintive
prayers for protection.
"I still don't understand," Meical Dorn complained, from inside the longest longhouse
"what this is all about. "None of the wildlings are anywhere nearby - I should know,
I've came through two hundred miles of forest to get here - and the only three towns
in this area are at peace with you. In Great Rabda, even an impending attack couldn't
make us cower inside like this. I have half a mind to think there's something you're
not telling me, Fin. Something that might...threaten our deal."
Fin Lerisas, Chief Lorekeeper for Tal Aivon, sighed. "Nothing that would threaten our
deal, Meical. Great Rabda has gold. We have sunblessings. Just stay here long enough
for our bankers to ﬁgure out the price, and you'll have timers and mathers and
lighters of your very own."
Meical glanced longingly at the Chief Lorekeeper's own sunblessing, a timer that stood
on the shelf of his private room. 1:52 AM gleamed on its face, with an maddeningly
smooth red glow unlike sunlight or moonlight or ﬁrelight. Yet Meical knew it was
sunlight, or something like. He was the Lorekeeper of Great Rabda. The Lorekeepers of
Tal Aivon were far wiser than he - how could they not be with the town's close
proximity to ruined Diteroi and its trove of artifacts from the Lost World - but even he
knew how sunblessings worked. You took them outside and the blue tiles on their
surface fed on sunlight. Then they worked various miracles. Timers would tell you the
time far more precisely than any sundial - invaluable in keeping the schedule of
sacred prayer decreed by St. Mahomet. Mathers would add and subtract quantities
more quickly than the fastest savant. Lighters would shine at night without wood or
kerosene.
Meical had no doubt that the Lorekeepers of Tal Aivon - the wisest on the Great
Peninsula - knew of still other sunblessings, ones that mighty but lore-deﬁcient Great
Rabda had never heard of. He himself would be happy with anything - even the
meanest timer. Of all the millions of wonders built by the Lost World, only the
sunblessings still worked, and they were in ﬁendishly short supply. While lore-rich Tal
Aivon had a timer upon each of its six gates, Great Rabda, for all its bountiful gold and
grain, had not a single sunblessing to call its own. As its Lorekeeper, it would aid his
status immensely if this trade mission was successful and he could bring something
back to demonstrate the power of the Lost World and, incidentally, his own
importance as keeper of its Lore.

But even his greed for power did not override his concern for his own safety. "I'm
serious, Fin. I want to know what's going on. I can't deal with a city that won't even
tell me why it's on high alert."
Fin Lerisas, Chief Lorekeeper of Tal Aivon and wisest in ancient matters on the whole
Great Peninsula, gave another sigh. "If you were not a Lorekeeper yourself, I would not
sure such secrets with a foreigner. But if it threatens the deal, very well. Only know
that you will be no happier with this knowledge, and that you may not sleep quite as
soundly on autumn nights from now on."
Meical gave a nod, indicating he wanted the old man to continue.
"In Great Rabda you have no sunblessings, and so you must keep the time like
wildlings, by watching the course of the sun. Here in Tal Aivon we have six timers, one
on each of the city gates, and so everyone down to the meanest peasant knows the
time, down to the second. To most, they check the time when they enter the city, and
the time when they leave the city, and they never think any more of it. We
Lorekeepers are more astute, but not inﬁnitely so. And so it was only forty years ago,
in the time when my uncle Derech was Chief Lorekeeper, that we noticed" (and here
his voice changed to a whisper) "that there is something wrong with Time."
"The stars," he continued "sometimes match the time as told by the timers, and
sometimes they do not. At ﬁrst we thought the ﬂaw was in the heavens themselves,
so perfect are the devices of the Lost World. But this so discomﬁted my uncle that for
three months he sat in front of this very timer, handing it oﬀ to an acolyte only when
he slept. And one night, his watch bore fruit."
"What happened?" asked Meical, breathlessly.
"Time moved backwards," said Fin.
"Impossible," said Meical.
"It was on this very night," said Fin. "Time, which three hundred sixty four days of the
year moves only in one direction, suddenly jumped backwards. And you yourself will
witness it."
He pointed to the timer on his shelf, which now read 1:59 AM. Its red glow suddenly
looked unfriendly, even eerie. Even though Meical knew it had to be sunlight at its
root, it held none of the wholesomeness of the sun.
And then it changed. 1:59 turned to 1:00.
Meical gasped, and his ﬁngers instantly formed the cross of St. Jesus and then the
crescent of St. Mahomet. "Madness!" he whispered.
"Something," said Fin, "is wrong with this night. It is not always this night - it can
come as early as three days before, or as late as three days after. My uncle worked
out the formula after several years. But every year, it happens. Time jumps
backwards."
"But why?" asked Meical. "Why would the gods do such a thing? Why would they
break the symmetry of the True Time and the heavens?"

"That's the worst part," said Fin. "When I was younger, I looked over my uncle's
formula - the one for calculating the day when the time skip would happen - and
found what he had missed. The day of the time skip is ﬁxed to the seven day calendar
of the Lost World. To the ancients, it would always occur on the same day of the week.
Sunday. Their holy day."
Meical felt his blood run cold. "That's...some coincidence."
"Perhaps," said Fin. "But I don't think it is a coincidence. The gods are just. They would
not play with Time as children play with blocks, picking one up here, then putting it
down far away. I think the ancients of the Lost World, the ones who could build the
great glass towers, the ones who manufactured sunblessings, the ones who made
Diteroi-That-Was - I think they took their magic and threw it against time, and broke it.
I think they wanted to become lords of time itself."
"But they failed," guessed Meical.
"They created a single hour," said Fin. "Of the nine thousand hours in a year, all but
one were made by the gods, but one was made by Man. What stopped them from
creating more, from creating an inﬁnite number of hours, from becoming immortal by
arresting the progression of Time? We will never know. But it is my belief that when
they saw what men had done, the gods stopped them before they could do worse.
Meical, I believe that is how the Lost World ended. A last ditch eﬀort by the gods to
save Time itself from the hubris of Man."
Meical was silent. For all their wisdom, none of the Lorekeepers claimed to know how
the Lost World ended. Surely the gods had pulverized it for some oﬀense, but what sin
could have been so dire as to doom those magniﬁcent glass towers, those great black
roads as smooth as water? Meical looked at the clock, gleaming 1:03 AM, and knew.
Knew in his heart that Fin was right.
"There is a day in the very early springtime," said Fin, "when an hour disappears. The
gods are stingy. They would not grant the ancients their victory. What they did with
that hour in springtime, I do not know. But their message is clear."
Meical shuddered again. Like all the inhabitants of Great Rabda, he had told the time
with the sun and the stars. But it had always been an approximation, not the to-the-
second True Time displayed on the six gates of Tal Aivon. And so in their ignorance
they had missed no fewer than two violations of Time, and it had fallen to the people
of Tal Aivon alone to guard these terrible secrets.
"You ask why we extinguish our ﬁres and pray this night. Nine thousand hours in the
year were made by the gods, but one was made by Man. I cannot help but wonder
what walks abroad, during the hour no god made. I cannot help but wonder what
spirits awake on the anniversary of the old world's death. When time itself stands
stagnant, what sorts of things breed within it? I prefer not to think about such things.
That is why for the past forty years, ever since my discovery, I have knelt with the
priests in the temple, and joined in their prayers. With an honored guest such as
yourself here, I thought to entertain you instead, to avoid worrying you. Now I see that
thought was vain. Will you come to the temple and pray with me?"
And so on the longest night of the year, Fin Lerisas, Chief Lorekeeper of Tal Aivon, and
Meical Dorn, Lorekeeper of Great Rabda, knelt in the temple and prayed to St. Jesus
and St. Mahomet that time continue, that 1:59 AM be followed by 2:00 AM just as it
always had in the past, and that the people be forgiven the sins of the Lost World,

which had dared to change Time itself. And lo, at the appointed hour the six clocks on
the six gates of Tal Aivon showed 2 AM, and the people rejoiced, and the kerosene
lights were lit and the city of Tal Aivon was lively and pleasant once again.
Three days later, Meical Dorn left Tal Aivon minus the gold he had brought but with a
sunblessing of his own, a beautiful slate-gray mather that would have the engineers of
Great Rabda dancing with glee. They had oﬀered him a timer instead, a beautiful
digital timer that even played short tunes at diﬀerent hours, but Meical had refused.
He bore a secret that need not trouble the people of Great Rabda. They would have a
mather, and calculate things lightning-quick, and never know that there was a ﬂaw in
Time that even the gods themselves could not resolve.
But until the day he died, every so often on chill autumn nights Meical Dorn would
look up at the stars and shudder.

