
Rational Ritual
1. On Rationalist Solstice and Epistemic Caution
2. Ritual Report: NYC Less Wrong Solstice Celebration
3. The Value (and Danger) of Ritual
4. Designing Ritual
5. Clumping Solstice Singalongs in Groups of 2-4
6. Ritual Report 2012: Life, Death, Light, Darkness, and Love.
7. Solstice 2015: What Memes May Come? (Part I)
8. Solstice 2015: What Memes May Come (Part II - Atheism, Rationality and Death)
9. The Summer Solstice Paradox
10. Visions of Summer Solstice
11. Stories of Summer Solstice
12. Funeral Ritual

On Rationalist Solstice and Epistemic
Caution
Since 2011, some LessWrong folk have observed the winter solstice, as a holiday ritual
celebrating human achievement in the face of a confusing, often terrifying world.
I've written in the past about the potential value, and danger, of ritual. Over the past
years my opinion shifted somewhat, but is still essentially summarized as: "I think
ritual is less epistemically fraught than generally exposing yourself to the beliefs of a
peer group (something that pretty much everyone does by default), and meanwhile
has many beneﬁts. We should be cautious of it, but it's a fairly important human
experience we shouldn't discard simply because it pattern-matches to woo."
Still, I think the practice of rational ritual should still involve a lot of epistemic care, on
the part of both organizers and participants.
Since 2012, in the various editions of the Solstice Book of Traditions, I've included a
disclaimer at the beginning, and I think it'd be valuable to have that more publicly
accessible so that people going into a Solstice can be properly informed.
Individual Solstice celebrations vary, and I can't promise that this document will
accurately reﬂect all organizers' intentions. But it reﬂects my own goals and hopefully
provides a reasonable starting context.
What is a Ritual?
A ritual is about making a sacriﬁce to imbue a moment with symbolic power, and
using that power to transform yourself. Ritual experience cannot be coerced - only
entered willingly by those that believe in them. A ritual that you don't believe in may
feel hollow, or alienating.
I do not believe ritual and rationality are inherently contradictory. The human brain
seems designed badly. It is hard to truly accept certain facts about the world, even
when you have empirical evidence - especially for facts involving large numbers, or
unspeakable horrors.
It can even be hard for your brain to accept truths like "You are not alone, and you can
do this."
Rituals can be useful, to internalize those facts.
They can also be useful to help make it true, that you are not alone, and you can do
this.
Nonetheless, with power comes responsibility. If you are considering participating in
the Rationalist Solstice, ﬁrst consider as carefully as you can, in the light of day with
your clear-thinking prefrontal cortex, whether the concepts herein seem true and good
- the sort of things you'd want to employ emotional tricks and a ritual journey to
cement. Or, if you are uncertain, that you nonetheless trust that a ritual invoking
these principles is a good thing to experience, for whatever your reasons.

If you are an organizer, each year you should reﬂect upon the principles here and the
speciﬁc content of the Solstice. A rationalist holiday doesn't just need people to
preserve one set of traditions - it needs cultural stewards to actively pursue truth,
who work to develop songs and stories that reﬂect our deepening understanding of
the nature of reality.
Principle Underpinnings
First, that rational inquiry and empirical evidence are the best tools to make sense of
the world.
Second, that our world is a harshly neutral world, with physics indiﬀerent to our
suﬀering.
Third, more subjectively, that it is right and good that we look upon the world and
have opinions about how to change it. That it is wrong that millions struggle in
poverty, or die of malaria, or are trapped by systems we built ourselves that are
indiﬀerent to our struggles.
Fourth, that you have the potential to help. Perhaps not now - maybe you must
ensure your own life is ﬂourishing before you are ready to help others or change the
broader world. But you would, if you could, and that you would like a night to
remember that possibility.
Fifth, some oddly speciﬁc things. These assumptions are not intrinsic to the solstice
ceremony, but they permeate many of the songs and stories and it seems best to
make them explicit:
Scientiﬁcally - That the modern astronomical understanding of the big bang, star
formation, and evolution are more or less correct. That the natural world is often
dangerous and human civilization could potentially be destroyed. That artiﬁcial
intelligence is quite possible, and will probably dramatically shape our future, sooner
or later, one way or another.
The more speciﬁc claims get less speciﬁc story and song lyrics, to avoid
overcommitting epistemically. Any speciﬁc empirical claim is something we should be
prepared to discard, no matter how pretty a song lyric.
Philosophically - Well, ethics is confusing, once you begin expanding your circle of
concern beyond tribes of 150, and evolution-honed intuitions break down. But it
seems to me:
That pointless suﬀering is bad. That the default state of nature - creatures, at least
some sentient, eating each other alive, populations kept in check by starvation and
disease - isn't okay.
That love and excitement and curiosity and creativity are good. This is arbitrary and
human-chauvinistic, but that's ﬁne. It's what we have. It is good when people build
things together, when they come to understand the world more deeply, when they
become more self aware. It is good that we relate to and love each other. It is good
that sometimes we laugh and joke and screw around.
That death is bad. Every time a conscious being which knows itself and doesn't want
to die is snuﬀed out of the world... that is a tragedy.

Strategically - that compassion is good, but not suﬃcient. That changing the world
requires deep thinking and innovation that often feels strange at ﬁrst glance.
And ﬁnally, sixth: that the neutral universe does not begrudge our dreams.
It does not fume at the death of smallpox or reduced scarcity or non-reproductive sex.
We can choose as best we can what is right, and work to bring about the best world
we can.
We may not agree on the speciﬁcs of what that means. The rest of the year, we may
argue about what exactly is right and good and how to best achieve it. But tonight, we
remember the visions we share. That in the space of all possible dreams, ours are
incredibly aligned. That we share the meta-dream: we can work together to reﬁne our
visions as we strive to make them real.
We can cooperate, and help one another along the way.

Ritual Report: NYC Less Wrong
Solstice Celebration
Note: Secular Solstice has evolved a bit since this original post (most noteably, it no
longer has a major Lovecraft theme. 
Last Friday, the NYC Less Wrong community held their ﬁrst Winter Solstice
Celebration. Approximately twenty of us gathered for dinner and a night of ritual. We
sang songs, told stories, and recited litanies. The night celebrated ancient
astronomers, and the work that humanity has done for the past 5000 years. It paid
tribute to the harshness of the universe, respecting it as worthy opponent. We
explored Lovecraftian mythology, which intersects with our beliefs in interesting ways.
And ﬁnally, we looked to the future, vowing to give a gift to tomorrow.
This is the ﬁrst of 2-3 posts on this subject. In this one, I'm telling a story about what
we did and why I wanted to. In the followup(s), I'll explain the design principles that
went into planning such an event, and what we learned from our ﬁrst execution of it.
I'll also be posting a PDF of a ritual book, similar to the one we read from but with a
few changes based on initial, obvious observations.
Why exactly did we do this? Doesn't this smack of organized religion? Who the hell is
Lovecraft and why do we care?
Depending on your background, this may require the bridging of some inferential
distance, as well as emotional distance. Bear with me.
 
(If at the end, you DO still think this was a dangerous idea, or one you don't want
popularized on Less Wrong, I want you to let me know. We're probably just going to
disagree, but I want a sense of what the costs are of emphasizing this type of thing
here)
Winter Solstice
To begin, a Just So Story, true enough for our purposes:
The Winter Solstice is the longest night of the year. It ushers in a time of cold and
darkness.
For young civilizations, it was a time when if you HADN'T spent the year preparing
adequately for the future, then before spring returned, you would run out of food and
die. If you hadn't striven to use your tribe's collective wisdom, to work hard beyond
what was necessary for immediate gratiﬁcation... if you hadn't harnessed the physical
and mental tools that humans have but that few other animals do... then the universe,
unﬂinchingly neutral, would destroy you without a second thought. And even if you did
do these things, it might kill you anyway. Because fairness isn't built into the
equations of the cosmos.

But it wasn't just the threat of death that inspired the ﬁrst winter holidays. It was that
sense of unfairness, coupled with the desperate hope that world couldn't really be
that unfair. It wouldn't have occurred to the ﬁrst squirrels that stored food for winter,
but it gradually dawned upon ancient hominids, as their capacity for abstract
reasoning developed, alongside their desire to throw parties.
Our tendency is to anthropomorphize. Today, we angrily yell at our cars and
computers when they fail us. Rationally we know they are unthinking hulks of metal,
but we still ascribe malevolence when the real culprit is a broken, unsentient machine.
There are plausible reasons for humans to have evolved this trait. One of the most
complicated tasks a human has to do is predict the actions of other humans. We need
to be able to make allies, to identify deceptive enemies, to please lovers. I'm not an
evolutionary psychologist and I should be careful when telling this sort of Just-So
story, but I can easily imagine selection pressures that resulted in a powerful ability to
draw conclusions about sentient creatures similar to ourselves.
And then, there was NOT a whole lot of pressure to NOT use this tool to predict, say,
the weather. Many natural forces are just too complex for humans to be good at
predicting. The rain would come, or it wouldn't, regardless of whether we ascribed it
to gods or "emergent complexity." So we told stories about gods, with human
motivations, and we honestly believed them because there was nothing better.
And then, we had the solstice.
The world was dark and cold. The sun was retreating, leaving us only with the pale
moon and stars that lay unimaginably far away. There was the enroaching threat of
death, and just as powerfully, there was the threat that sentient cosmic forces that
held supreme power over our world were turning their backs on us. And the best we
could hope for was to throw a celebration in their honor and pray that they wouldn't
be angry forever, that the sun would return and the world would be reborn.
And regardless, take a moment to be glad for having worked hard the previous year,
so that we had meat stored up and wine that had ﬁnished fermenting.
But as ages passed, people noticed something interesting: there was a pattern to the
gods getting angry. Weather may be complex and nigh-unpredictable. But the
movements of the heavens... they follow rules simple enough for human minds to
understand, if only you take the time to look.
We had a question. "When will the sun retreat, and when will it return?"
When you really care about knowing the answer, you can't make something up. When
you need to plan your harvest and prepare for winter so that your family doesn't
starve, you can't just say "Oh, God will stop getting angry in a few months."
If you want real knowledge, that you can apply to make your world better...
Then you need to do science. Astronomy was born.
I want to give you some perspective on how much we cared about this. Stonehenge is
an ancient archaeological wonder. To the best of our knowledge, it began as a burial
site around 3000 BCE. Over the next thousand years, it was gradually built, in major
phases of activity every few hundred years. Between 2600 and 2400 BCE, there was a

surge of construction. Huge stones were carted over huge distances, to create a
monument that's lasted ﬁve thousand years.
30 Sarsen stones. Each of them was at least 25 tons. They were carried 25 miles.
80 bluestones. Four tons each. Carried over 150 miles.
In this era, the height of locomotive technology was "throw it on a pile of logs and roll
it."
We don't know exactly how they did all this. We don't know all the reasons why. But
we know at least one: The megaliths at Stonehenge are arranged, very speciﬁcally, to
predict the Solstices. To the moment of dawn.
30 stones, each 25 tons, carried over 25 miles. 80 stones, each four tons, each carried
over 150 miles.
200 years of that.
That's how much we cared about the answer to that question.
A Modern Journey
To modern society, Winter Solstice isn't very scary. We have oil to heat our homes, we
have mechanical plows that clear our streets when the snow falls and other
mechanical plows that work our ﬁelds all year round to supply us with food, carted
from thousands of miles away, across land and sea. Many people today claim to enjoy
Winter, although Richard Adams may accurately say that they really enjoy their
protection from it.
Modern winter holidays are about enjoying that protection, not assuaging fear.
But there is a power in that, all the same. My family's Christmas Eve celebration is one
of my favorite parts of the year. The extended family gathers. We have a big feast.
Then 20+ people huddle up and sing songs and tell stories for hours. I don't believe in
the literal messages of these rituals, but they have a power to them that I rarely see
outside of religious-inspired works of art. They feel timeless and magical even though
most Christmas carols have only existed for 50 years or so. The repetition of them
each year grants them ritual strength. And the closeness I feel with my family grants
them warmth.
Together, all these things are precious.
I didn't realize how precious, though, until the year I invited a friend of mine to the
Christmas Eve party. Her ﬁrst reaction amused me: "Wait, you guys literally sit around
a ﬁre and sing Christmas carols? Like, in movies?" Her second reaction, as the night
ended, was even more amusing: "Oh my god, I had no idea Christmas could be so
awesome!" But I knew what she meant, and it was accompanied with the realization
that NOT everybody got to have experiences like this.
And that made Christmas Eve all the more special. It also made me realize how
ridiculous it is that I only get to have that experience once a year.
That desire nagged at me a few years, and it was accompanied by another nagging
dissatisfaction: That I didn't really believe in the words of the songs. They had power,
generated by the magnitude of the songwriter's belief, and given lyric form by

carefully honed skill. But they weren't true, and the falsehood itched at the back of my
mind. Not because of the songs themselves, but because there weren't other songs,
equally beautiful and with the same cultural weight, that were about things that I truly
believed in.
Flash forward ﬁve years. I've since discovered the sequences at Less Wrong. They
outline studies in human behavior, how lots of our thinking is ﬂawed if we want to
achieve particular goals, how it can be hard to even know what our goals ARE, and
why these are incredibly important questions to answer. Not just so we can succeed at
life, but because if you're developing machine intelligence, and you haven't studied
these questions (and solved problems that are, as I write this, unsolved), you could
really, really, wreck the world. Wreck it worse than cold, uncompromising Nature ever
could, worse and more unrecoverably than Hollywood has portrayed in explosive
blockbuster ﬁlms.
But if these questions are answered, and certain technological problems are solved,
we can do incredible, important, beautiful things. In the past year I've read powerful
works of science, prose, and poetry that have resonated with all my strongest values.
They've changed how I approach my life and how I look at the future.
For the past year I've attended the local Less Wrong meetup. I've made new friends.
I've gotten involved with a community that encourages everyone to ﬁgure out what
their goals are and try to achieve them, using the best tools they can ﬁnd. We're
going through similar life experiences. And for the past year, I've been seeking out
songs and stories that are fun, powerful and that we all truly believe in.
Ritual has been important in my life. I recognize that there is a risk whenever you
begin elevating ideas and seeking them out because they are powerful and moving. I
don't want to start a self-propogating organization designed to accrue followers blindly
reciting the faith. But those of us who have studied these ideas and take them
seriously - I want us to be able to ﬁnd each other, to create friendship and family, and
to celebrate together.
However, these powerful beliefs we share come with a cost:
I now believe a lot of really weird stuﬀ that's hard to explain to the average person
without sounding crazy. To certain people, they sound genuinely horrifying. I believe
that living forever is a perfectly reasonable goal. I think that in the not too distant
future, people will be able to radically alter their minds and bodies. In the not much
more distant future, there's a good chance people will be able to live as uploaded
computer programs. More frightening: I believe that people will eventually WANT to do
this.
To be clear: I'm currently lukewarm about a lot of this - my beliefs are complex, and
like most humans I have a poor understanding of what I really value. But I can imagine
the future me, plugging into the Matrix like it was no big deal.
All of this pales compared to the possibility of AI. The rest of humanity goes about
their daily lives, planning for a future that involves slightly smaller iPhones and bigger
televisions, vaguely annoyed that it's 2012 and we don't have ﬂying cars yet.
Blissfully unaware that with barely any warning, an AGI might be created and then
bootstrap itself to godhood.
Blissfully unaware of how big mindspace is, and how little human morality would
matter to a ghost of perfect emptiness, and how hard it is to create a mind from

scratch that would care about us the way we care about ourselves.
But perhaps most blissful of all, they look upon the horrors that nature has inﬂicted us,
and they give them nice sounding names like "God's mysterious ways", or "The
Natural Order of Things."
 
Alien Gods, and Other Horrors
 
Now, who the hell is Lovecraft and why should we care?
H.P. Lovecraft was a science ﬁction/horror writer from the 1920s. He wrote about alien
gods, about humans changing their bodies and minds, about the pursuit of
immortality. But what makes him particularly relevant is one dominant underlying
theme - that the universe is absolutely, unforgivingly neutral. That human life and
morality has no inherent value. That mind-space is huge, and that possibility space is
even huger, and that 99% of the things in possibility space are utterly terrifying to
modern human values. "All my tales," Lovecraft said, "are based on the fundamental
premise that common human laws and interests and emotions have no validity or
signiﬁcance in the vast cosmos-at-large."
Lovecraft identiﬁed as an atheist, a materialist and even a rationalist, and his
protagonists often identify as such. He was also, as far as I can tell, a pessimist who
hated people in general. I'm not sure what his beliefs about morality in the real world
were. But he fascinates me because his writings suggest a dark mirror image of our
ideals. Professor Quirrell to our Harry Potter, as a certain fanﬁction would have it.
This is how Call of Cthulhu begins:
"The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to
correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black
seas of inﬁnity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each
straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing
together of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of
our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or ﬂee
from the light into the peace and safety of a new dark age."
We, of the Less Wrong community, have gotten a glimpse of an expanse of possibility-
space outside the scope of most people's imagination. I know some people who are
genuinely incapable of processing it. I know others who would, unless they took an
initially painful plunge into the deep after us, look upon us with confusion and despair.
We ask hard questions about humanity, and about the universe, and a lot of the
answers are dark. The Milgram experiment has been repeated many times, and
consistently, we ﬁnd that over half of humanity is willing to electrocute another
person to death on the authority of a man in a lab coat. Across the world, people are
born into situations — some natural, some human-made — where they can't provide
for themselves, and it is often beyond their power to change that situation.
Every day, approximately 150,000 people die, their minds forever gone.

These are the facts. Some people stare into the Abyss and the Abyss stares back and
they crawl away from the truth into the safety of ignorance.
These are facts, but there is more than one way to feel about them. We can look at
the darkness of the world and wallow in despair. We can make up reasons why the
darkness isn't so bad. Or we can look at the light, the things that, by our standards,
are beautiful and good. And we can say:
"This is what is possible. This is the kind of future we can have."
And we can look at the darkness and say: "This is not acceptable. We will not rest until
it is gone." However long it takes, however hard. Our gift and curse is that we look at
something as awful as Death and see no natural order of things, only a problem to be
solved, that we can't in good conscience resign ourselves to accepting.
We can do all this without Lovecraft or other made up stories. There are plenty of
truths that are powerful and beautiful enough to craft a night of ritual. But an
important part of Solstice Festivals IS the fun, the joviality. It can be diﬃcult to slip
directly into the kind of profound state that I want to achieve. In my family's
Christmas Eve, we begin the night with songs about Santa and Frosty - boistrous, fun
songs that suggest a time of magic, friendship and generosity, even if they don't
actually have to do with a virgin born savior. As we progress through the hymnal, the
songs grow more somber, and they turn to the ideas that Christmas is supposed to
actually be about - the birth of Christ, peace on earth, God's forgiveness of the world.
We end with a solemn Silent Night.
In this Solstice Eve celebration, Cthulhu, Azathoth and the Necronomicon play a part
akin to Santa Claus - fun, ridiculous things that don't directly parallel AI or Existential
Risk or Evolution or Immortality, but which nonetheless pay tribute to the core ideas
that make those things important to us.
The night begins with many sources of light - from candles and oil lamps to gas
lanterns to ﬂorescent bulbs to lasers and lava lamps. We begin with fun songs like "It's
Beginning to Look A Lot Like Fish Men." As the night progresses, we turn the lights oﬀ,
one by one, and the songs grow darker. We occasionally read relevant snippets of
Lovecraft, then abridged versions of Eliezer's Sequences. We read the Litany of Tarski,
over and over, each time facing a darker possibility that we must prepare ourselves
for.
The Gift We Give to Tomorrow will be read with one candle remaining, extinguished
immediately afterward.
Solstice Celebrations haven't been truly scary for a long time, and I think that's a
mistake. We are alive today, enjoying the comfort of a warm apartment with food on
the table, because millions of people have spent their lives preparing for the future.
Using the best wisdom their tribe was able to give them. Finding new wisdom of their
own. Working hard. Sometimes courageously speaking out, when the tribe feared a
new idea. Dragging eight-thousand-pound rocks across 150 miles of land so that they
could ﬁgure out when winter was coming, and prepare, so that they and their children
could survive.
We honor those people, those ﬁrst astronomers, and all the laborers and scientists
and revolutionaries who have come since, for creating the world we have today.

And then we look to our future. Tiny stars in the distant sky, unimaginably far away,
surrounded by black seas of inﬁnity.
We will stare into that Abyss, and the Abyss will stare back at us. But we will go crazy-
meta and challenge the Abyss to a staring contest and win the hell at it, because
we're aspiring rationalists and good rationalists win.
And then, jubilantly, sing of a tomorrow that is brighter than today, a tomorrow where
we are worthy of those stars, and have the power to reach them.
 
 
 
 
This begins the Ritual mini-sequence. The next article is The Value (and Danger) of
Ritual.

The Value (and Danger) of Ritual
This is the second part of my Winter Solstice Ritual mini-sequence. The introduction
post is here.
-
Ritual is an interesting phenomenon to me. It can be fun, beautiful, profound, useful...
and potentially dangerous.
Commenters from the previous article fell into two main camps - those who assumed I
knew what I was doing and gave me the beneﬁt of the doubt, and those who were
afraid I was naively meddling with forces beyond my comprehension. This was a
reasonable fear. In this article, I'll outline why I think ritual is important, why it's
dangerous, why I think it's relevant to an aspiring rationalist culture.
Before I start arguing how meaningful and transformative ritual can be, I want to
argue something simpler:
It can be really fun.
This is not to be discounted. For whatever reason, humans tend to appreciate songs,
stories and activities that they shared with their tribe. Hedons from ritual can take the
form of fun joviality as well as intense, profound experiences.
Not everything we evolved to do is good. If we feel an urge to hit the enemy
tribesman with a huge rock and take their land, we can and should say "No, there are
important game theoretic and moral reasons why this is a bad idea" and suppress the
urge. But we can also devise new activities, like knocking the enemy tribesman over
and taking their ball, satisfying that urge without the negative consequences of war.
I'd like access to the experience that ritual uniquely oﬀers, if it can be done safely.
Ritual covers a range of experience. One subset of that is a kind of art. To give you
some sense of what I mean here, here's a few clusters of activities.
Art, enjoyed alone for simple aesthetics.
Art that speaks to your beliefs.
Art that you enjoy appreciating with other people.
Beliefs that you enjoy sharing with other people.
Repetition of activities that you do every year.
And here are a few songs I like:
Silent Night
Carol of the Bells
Do You Hear What I Hear
The Word of God
Singularity
Art and Belief

I like Silent Night because it is a simple, tranquil song, often sung with skillful
harmonies.
I like Carol of the Bell because it is a powerful, awe-inspiring song that is performed
with immense complexity and skill.
I like Do You Hear What I Hear partly for the same reasons I like Silent Night - it begins
with simple tranquility. But I also like it for ideological reasons - it showcases the
power of a meme growing over time, magnifying, evolving and changing the lives of
its hosts as they come to believe it. As an artist hoping to craft powerful memes, this
is very important to me. I also like the imagery of the proud king, willing to listen to
the words of a shepherd boy, acknowledging the importance of a small infant born
into poverty far away.
And the king is able to command the attention of an entire nation: Take a moment,
stop what you are doing, and pay attention to this child.
But Do You Hear What I Hear also bothers me slightly - it lies in the uncanny valley of
ideological identiﬁcation. The song strikes very close to home in my heart, and I want
to give myself over to the song, not just to sing the words but to truly feel them in my
heart. And I can't, because there is a slight snag when we get to the proud king. The
king is valuing the child for all the wrong reasons. I want the child to be important
because all children are important. But this king would not have given the child a
second thought if it hadn't been the son of God. I don't believe in Jesus, so the
intended message of the song clashes with what I want it to be about.
For the most part I sing the song without thinking about this, but that little snag is
there, and it prevents the song from being one of my favorites ever.
Contrast this with Silent Night, where the message is largely irrelevant to me. Or Carol
of the Bells, whose message is "Bells are pretty and people like them." I appreciate
them aesthetically and I respect skilled performers. Their messages don't bother me,
but neither do I feel as strongly about them.
Art and Tribe
The Word of God is beautiful because the world is an incredible place, and humans
have discovered millions of beautiful true things about it. There is exactly one thing I
dislike about this song, and it is not a disagreement with its ideology. It's just the use
of the word "God." I don't think it was wrong word to use - it's a nice, simple word and
I read it purely as a metaphor for "the universe."
Like Do you Hear, there is some uncanny-valley eﬀect here. But here it's about tribal
identiﬁcation. (I draw a distinction between tribal identity and ideology - tribe is about
identifying with a group of people, ideology is identifying with a belief-structure).
My mind snags because "God" is a word I normally associate with other cultures. This
isn't as big a deal as in Do You Hear. I don't actually consider the goddists to be my
enemy, I just don't feel connected to them, and the word takes me out of the beauty
of the song and reminds me of this disconnection. I did go ahead and include Word of
God, verbatim, in the Winter Solstice Celebration. I just want to note that there are
diﬀerent reasons to be moved by (or fail to be moved by) a song.

[Edit in 2018: we've since re-written Word of God (after touching base with the
original songwriter) to focus more purely on scientiﬁc progress rather than God. This
was less because "God" was problematic and more because it kept the focus on
political conﬂict that didn't seem good for Solstice longterm]
Finally, we have Singularity, which I like for all kinds of reasons.
The music begins whimsical and fun, but grows more powerful and exciting over time.
If you have good speakers, there's a heavy but subtle baseline that drives the sound
through your bones. It was refreshing to hear an unapologetic vision of how amazing
the future could be. And when the sound abruptly cuts out and the song resets,
there's another image I really like - that humanity is not special because we were
created by some God for a grand purpose. Instead, we are special precisely because
we were shaped by random forces in an un-extraordinary corner of the universe, and
all of our potential power and greatness comes from our own desires, intellect and
drive.
So it's ideologically moving to me. But I didn't really realize until I sang in a group how
tribally moving it could be. I wasn't sure people would like the song. The chorus in
particular sounds silly when you sing it by yourself. But as a group, everyone got really
into it, and yes the chorus was still a little silly but we got up and waved our arms
around and belted it out and it felt really good to be part of a group who believed that
this weird, outlandish idea was in fact very plausible and important.
So that was cool.
I also thought it slightly terrifying.
Songs like Singularity are what give me the most pause about encouraging Less
Wrong culture and rituals.
Signaling Issues
There are two big issues with ritual. The ﬁrst is how it makes other people perceive us.
Rituals are, almost by deﬁnition, symbolic actions that look a little weird from the
outside. They normally seem okay, because they are ancient and timeless (or at least
were created a few years before people started paying attention). But any Less Wrong
ritual is going to have all the normal weirdness of "fresh" tradition, and it's going to
look extra strange because we're Less Wrong, and we're going to be using words like
"ritual" and "tribal identiﬁcation" to matter-of-factly describe what we're doing.
Some people may be turned oﬀ. Skeptics who speciﬁcally turned to rationality to
escape mindless ritual that was forced upon them may ﬁnd this all scary. Quality,
intelligent individuals may come to our website, see an article about a night of ritual
and then tune out and leave.
I think this is an acceptable cost to pay. Because for good or for ill, most humans like
emotional things that aren't strictly rational. Many people are drawn to the Sequences
not just because they say important things, but because Eliezer crafted an emotional
narrative around his ideas. He included litanies and parables, which move us in a way
that pure logic often can't.

There are smart cynics who will be turned oﬀ, but there are also smart idealists who
will be drawn to recognizable human emotional arcs. I don't think ritual should be the
FIRST thing potential newcomers see, but I think it is something that will get them
fully involved with our community and the important things we believe. I think it may
particularly help former theists, who have built their entire lives around a community
and ritual infrastructure, make the transition into atheists who are proud of their new
beliefs and do productive things.
It may even help current theists make the transition, if they can see that they WON'T
have to be giving up that community and ritual infrastructure, and all the hedons that
went along with it.
But there's another cost to ritual, that can't be resolved quickly with a cost-beneﬁt
analysis.
[Update from 2016 - I want to clarify that while I think Less Wrong as a community is a
reasonable place for ritual and culture-building, there are other related communities
and organizations that are more "PR sensitive" and I don't think should be connected
to ritual]
Dangers of Reinforcement
Ritual taps into a lot of regions of our brain that are explicitly irrational, or at least a-
rational. I don't think we can aﬀord to ignore those regions - they are too essential to
our existence as humans to simply write oﬀ. We didn't evolve to use pure logic to hold
together communities and inspire decisions. Some people may be able to do this, but
not most.
I think we need ritual, but I would be a fool to deny that we're dealing with a
dangerous force. Ritual is a self-reinforcing carrier wave for ideas. Those ideas can
turn out to be wrong, and the art that was once beautiful and important can turn
hollow or even dangerous. Even true ideas can be magniﬁed until you ignite a happy
death spiral, giving them far more of your time than they deserve.
Some of this can be mitigated by making traditions explicitly about the rational
process, and building evaluation into the ritual itself. We can review individual
elements and remove them if necessary. We can even plan to rewrite them into new
parodies that refute the old idea, ceremoniously discarding our old ideas. But this will
be a meaningless process unless we are putting in genuine eﬀort - not just doing a
dutiful review as good rationalists should.
We can recite the Litany of Tarski, but unless you are truly considering both
possibilities and preparing yourself for them, the words are useless. No amount of pre-
planning will change the fact that using ritual will require deliberate eﬀort to protect
you from the possibility of insanity.
You should be doing this anyway. There are plenty of ways to fall into a happy death
spiral that don't involve candle-lit gatherings and weird songs. When you're dealing
with ideas as powerful as the Singularity - a meme that provides a nice, sound-byte
word that suggests a solution to all of the most terrible problems humanity faces - you
should already be on guard against wishful thinking. When you're talking about those
ideas in a group, you should already be working hard - genuinely hard, not just

performing a dutiful search - to overcome group think and evaporative cooling and
maintain your objectivity.
You should be doing that no matter what. Every cause wants to be a cult, whether or
not they have a nice word that sounds way simpler than it actually is that promises to
solve all the world's problems.
Ritual does make this harder. I'm particularly wary of songs like Singularity, which
build up a particular idea that still has a LOT of unknown factors. An anonymous
commenter from the Solstice celebration told me they were concerned about the song
because it felt like they were "worshipping" the Singularity, and I agree, this is
concerning, both for our own sanity and for the signaling it implies to newcomers who
stumble upon this discussion.
I'd go ahead and exclude the song, and any meme that got too speciﬁc with too many
uncertainties.... except that a lot of our most powerful, beautiful images come from
speciﬁc ideas about the future. A generic rallying cry of "Science!", "Humanism!" or
"Rationality!" is not a satisfying answer to the problems of Death and Global Suﬀering
and Existential Risk. It's not satisfying on an artistic level, an intellectual level or a
tribal level. Having speciﬁc ideas about how to steer the future is what gives our
group a unique identity. Caring too much about that identity is dangerous, but it can
also be extremely motivational.
As of now, I'm not sure what I think about this particular problem. I look forward to
commenters weighing in.
With all this dire warning, it may seem like a slam dunk case, to abandon the idea of
ritual. Obviously, I disagree, for a few reasons.
The ﬁrst is that honestly, gathering a few times a year to sing "Singularity!
Singularity!", even without all the preventative measures, simply pales in signiﬁcance
compared to... well... the entire Less Wrong community-memeplex doing what it does
on a regular basis.
If we were genuinely concerned about making bad decisions due to reinforcement
rituals, I'd start by worrying about much more mundane rituals, like continuously
discussing the Singularity all the time. Constantly talking about an idea trains your
brain to think of it as important. Hanging out on forums with a constant stream of
news about it creates conﬁrmation and availability bias. If you're concerned about
irrationality, as opposed to weird ceremonies that might signal low status, you should
already be putting a lot of eﬀort into protecting yourself against a happy death spiral,
and the extra eﬀort you need to expend for a few nights of jubilant celebration
shouldn't be that signiﬁcant.
The danger of ceremonial ritual in particular is real, but overestimating it isn't much
better than underestimating it. Even if we're just talking about ritual as a source of
hedons that we've previously denied ourselves. Families across the world gather to
sing songs about ideas they like, and while this may be a human behavior we need to
sacriﬁce, I'm not going to do so out of fear of what *might* happen without a decent
understanding of why.
But there's more to it than that. And this is why I've worked so hard on this, and why I
think the potential upsides are so important.

Aspiring Rationalist Culture
I had two major motivations for the Solstice celebration. One of them was to produce
a fun event for my community, and to inspire similar events for people across the
world who share my memes.
The other was personal: Rationality training has made me better at identifying good
solutions, but it hasn't made those solutions emotionally salient. This is particularly
important when it comes to optimal philanthropy - a million starving people across the
world simply can't compete with a single smiling orphan I get to personally deliver a
christmas present to. And those people have an even harder time if they live in the
distant future.
Scope insensitivity and time discounting can be hard to overcome. Worst of all is when
the best solution might not work, and I may not even live to see it work, and I can
never get the emotional satisfaction of knowing I actually helped anyone at all.
I constructed the Solstice celebration around a narrative, based around the interplay
between past, present and future. The process of crafting that narrative was
extremely valuable to me, and has helped me to ﬁnally give Existential Risk the
weight it deserves. I haven't committed to helping SIAI in particular, but I feel like I'm
at place where if I got better information on how eﬀective SIAI is, I'd be emotionally
able to act on that information.
I don't think the ﬁrst execution of the Solstice celebration successfully provided other
people with that experience, but I think there is tremendous potential in the idea. I'd
like to see the development of a culture that doesn't glorify any particular solution,
but which takes important rationality concepts and helps people modify their
emotions match the actual expected values of actions that would otherwise seem
cold, hard and calculating.
I think this may turn out to be very important.
In some ways this has me far more scared than ritual-as-hedons. People can gather for
a night of jovial fun and come away mostly unchanged. Using ritual *deliberately* to
modify yourself is risky, and it is perhaps riskiest if you think you have a good reason
for doing so.
I don't think this is that dangerous on the individual level. It was useful to me, I think
others may ﬁnd value in it. Actually allowing yourself to be changed in a meaningful
way requires eﬀort beyond an initial, inspiring ceremony. (It took me several weeks of
intense work *preparing* the Solstice celebration, cemented by a ﬁnal moment when
a few ideas clicked into place and I came up with a metaphor I could use to alter my
emotions. I don't know for sure whether this can be distilled into a process that others
can use with less eﬀort).
Next year, I expect the people who come to Solstice for the comfort and hedons will
get what they need, and if anyone wants to use it as a springboard for self-
modiﬁcation, they will be able to as well.
The possibility that most concerns me is a chain of events going something like this:
1. Someone (possibly a future version of me, possibly any random person perusing
these articles) will decide that this is important enough to deliberately propagate

on a mass scale.
2. Said person will become good enough at ritual-craft (or use additional dark arts
techniques) to make this much more eﬀective than I currently anticipate.
3. The result is an eﬀective but low-status self-propagating organization that ends
up corrupting the original goal of "help people be better at following through on
correct but emotionally unsatisfying choices."
This scenario requires someone to put a lot of work in, and they would probably fail
uneventfully even if they did. Even if events transpire this way, the problem is less
that a hollow self-propagating memeplex exists (it's not like we don't already have
plenty of them, one more won't hurt that much) but that its association with Less
Wrong and related things may tarnish our reputation.
I'd like to think this is a bad thing, although truth be told I think it assumes a level of
importance that Less Wrong hasn't really carved or itself yet in the greater world. But
we are trying to gain status and out of respect for the community I should
acknowledge this risk, and sincerely solicit feedback.
My current assessment is that a) this is unlikely, and b) any organization that's trying
to accomplish things on a large scale WILL have to accept the risk that it transforms
into a hollow, self perpetuating memeplex. If you don't want that risk at all, you're
probably not going to aﬀect the world in a noticeable way. Ritual-driven memeplexes
tend to be religions, which many of us consider a rival tribe, so they carry more
emotional weight in our risk assessment. But this can also happen to corporations,
unions, non-proﬁts and political movements that may have been genuinely valuable at
some point.
I do plan to study this issue in more detail over the coming year. If anyone does have
speciﬁc literature or examples that I should be aware of, I'd appreciate it. But my
priors are that the few negative reactions I've gotten to this are based more out of
emotion than a clear understanding of the risks.
My ﬁnal concern is that this simply isn't a topic that Less Wrong should encourage that
much of, partly because some people ﬁnd it annoying and partly because we really
should be spending our time developing tools for rational thinking and studying
scientiﬁc literature. I have another article or two that I think would be valuable enough
for the main page, and after that I'll be inviting people to a separate mailing list if they
want to collaborate.
This is the second post of the ritual mini-sequence. The next post is Designing Ritual.

Designing Ritual
This is the third post in my ritual mini-sequence. My ﬁrst article was an emotional
rallying cry around of the idea of a rational-(trans)humanist culture. My second article
examined the value and potential dangers of ritual.
So far, I remain convinced that ritual is a valuable experience for most people. I don't
know if there can or should be a uniﬁed "Less Wrong" culture, but I do think individual
communities should consider creating their own ("rational-humanist" or otherwise).
Ritual can be a useful source of fun, comfort and inspiration for positive change. A
decent heuristic for "Should my meetup try this?" is "Do the people at my meetup
think this sounds cool?"
This article is both an explanation of certain design principles, and a case study of my
attempt at one particular kind of community event.
Designing Timelessness
So, say your community decides to incorporate some ritual. How do you do that?
Ritual-space is large, and includes things as simple as "Pass around dark chocolate at
the beginning of meetups." You probably already have some kind of ritual going on.
Over time, these small traditions can accumulate into something interesting and
comforting. But if you're like me, you want something more powerful - you want the
gravitas of an ancient cultural cornerstone, and you want it now.
This is... a challenge.
"Creating tradition" almost feels like an oxymoron. To be eﬀective, it has to have a
timeless quality about it. It doesn't have to actually be ancient, but it needs to feel
resonant, familiar and personal. Most ritual is created through a combination of artistic
skill and memetic evolution. A few central traditions begin the process (say, a
particular feast, prayer and/or anthem), and then the ritual begins to spread from
family to family, adapting in response to memetic selection pressure, ﬁlling speciﬁc
niches, often resulting in bizarre injokes and absurdities. The absurdities can actually
help bind a community together, as a badge of pride.
Powerful governments and religions can attempt to steer this. The Catholic church
votes on deliberate changes to their ceremonies. But the church could not have
intentionally created Modern Western Christmas - a bizarre gestalt of pagan and
christian mythology, random stories, eventually infused with modern capitalism to
become a monolithic culture and industry.
One of the hardest things an artist can do is create a work that appears to have
already been weathered by natural forces. It's much easier to create a clean room
than a crumbling ruin. The weight of ancient cultural cornerstones is built out of a lot
of subtle details, and if you get them wrong, you'll get a ridiculous, uncanny-valley
eﬀect (especially if you were taking everything really seriously).
But I think it can be done. The Solstice celebration I put together was a solid ﬁrst
attempt, and I feel that much more is possible. I'm going to walk through my design
process, and then discuss what areas I think needed more work. I recently ﬁnished the
Extended Edition With Commentary of the evening's songbook. You can either look it

over now, or after reading this article. (Ordinarily I'd say art should stand on its own
without explanation, but since the actual "art" was an interactive ceremony, I don't
think it matters much. The book is intended to be its own kind of art, but I'll leave it up
to you.)
...
(Pausing here a moment so that the people who wanted to look over the book ﬁrst
have a second chance to do so, before being carried forward by inertia.)
...
All right. These were among my biggest considerations, when creating the Solstice
celebration:
Have a Goal
Build on the Familiar
Do Research, and Cultivate Diversity of Experience
Manage Complexity
Field Testing
Remember (And Re-Evaluate) your Goal
Have A Goal
My primary goal for the Solstice was personal, and perhaps selﬁsh: I wanted a
particular, profound, intense experience. I'd had pieces of it in the past - communal
singing, tribal belonging, reading beautiful prose that resonated with me. I've been to
religious events and felt a hint of their potency. I wanted to weave all these elements
into a single experience.
A related goal, not quite so selﬁsh, was wanting to channel this power into changing
myself, to inspire myself to be the kind of person I wanted to be.
Closely intertwined with those goals was the desire to create a fun, and hopefully
moving experience for my community. In some ways this was instrumental to the ﬁrst
goals, but the event wouldn't have worked if I hadn't genuinely cared about creating
something that everyone could enjoy together, for their own sake.
An unrelated goal, which I had to take care not to override more important ones, is
that I've been wanting to have a Cthulhu-caroling party since like forever.
It took several months for these to weave into a single, uniﬁed plan for the evening.
I'll return to that in a moment.
Build on the Familiar
Culture can be created, but not from nothing. You'll need to work oﬀ existing ideas
that your tribe already shares.
One of the most important functions that tradition and ritual serve is to comfort. From
what I've read and experienced, humans are hardwired to feel on-edge when they're
in an unfamiliar situation. Uncertainty is a heuristic for danger - both to your physical
life, and ostracization from the group (ultimately making it harder to ﬁnd a mate). My
accompanying just-so story is that repeated social traditions make your brain feel safe
- you're surrounded by people doing familiar things you understand, so you don't have

worry about suddenly getting kicked out of the group for no reason. You're also
surrounded by friends that could probably protect you if a tiger suddenly jumped out
of the woods and attacked.
So if you want to induce that warm comfort, you'll need to be working with memes
and activities that feel familiar. The NYC meetup has some diverse values, but we
share a vision of the power of human achievement, and a future that is better
speciﬁcally because of scientiﬁc progress. We also share an understanding of how
dangerous and cruel the universe can be. Most of us have had these beliefs for a
while, but it was Eliezer's Sequences that crystalized them into a coherent, speciﬁc
and moving worldview, and brought us together as a community.
So the Sequences provided the content. But I turned to existing religious rituals for the
structure. I knew that my family's Christmas Eve (where we feast, then gather and
sing carols for hours, with a gradual emotion arc from silly-to-serious) was a good
frame to build around. I've also had experience with Catholic Mass and a Seder, which
incorporated stories alongside songs. These sorts of events are ubiquitous throughout
our culture. Even if you don't have personal experience with them, you've probably
grown up with ingrained stereotypes about them and vaguely identify them as
"normal."
I think this was the single most important point - we had content that resonated with
everyone, built around a structure that was familiar.
Big ideas are important, but weaving together smaller memes was also key. I looked
for songs, stories or activities that I knew were already popular among our group:
Our group has a fondness for dark chocolate, which has become something of a
tribal badge. I don't actually even like dark chocolate that much, but it's oddly
comforting to pass it around the living room.
Songs like "Still Alive" and "RE Your Brains" are crowd favorites in our group.
They aren't exactly on theme, but everyone knows them, and they were woven
into the evening's narrative easily enough. Monty Python and Tom Lehrer also
provided some examples, which were not only familiar but are just old enough to
feel slightly "traditional".
We're not all Lovecraft enthusiasts, but most of us are at least passingly familiar
with them as a facet of nerd culture. There also is an existing large body of
Lovecraft-inspired songs (on a CD entitled "A Very Scary Solstice"), that some of
us already knew, and which parodied existing Christmas carols which would
make them easier to learn.
Our group is predominantly Jewish (ethnically, at least). We actually had a
Rationalist Seder earlier in the year. This gave me an initial "reverse hanukkah"
idea (turning out lights to represent the darkness of the universe).
These things made sense to consider for my community, and together they suggested
a particular interpretation of the Sequences. They may not make sense for your
community. If you want to do something like this, you'll have to look at your own
community, identify your own proto-rituals, and use them to create something that
feels like it's evolved around your group's selection pressures.
Research, and Diversity of Experience
Not only will culture look weird if you create it from scratch, but it's almost literally
impossible to create an idea from scratch, period. Creativity is about combining

diﬀerent ideas together in interesting ways. It's a lot easier to do this if you have a
variety of interesting concepts to work with.
I started this endeavor with an array of background knowledge - I've had a lot of
exposure to folk music and have written some amateur songs. I've trained in visual
art, communications and game design (what you might more generally call
"interactive media."). I've looked at several religious communities and seen a few
diﬀerent ways that ceremonies have been put together. These were valuable
disciplines to draw upon.
On top of that, I did research on traditional solstice celebrations and the origin of H.P.
Lovecraft's ideas. I shouldn't need to sell Less Wrongers on the value of research, but
a common pitfall of amateur artists is that they get one good idea and then assume
that's good enough. They don't care about factual accuracy, they're just making "art",
and they're being "creative" which means inventing ideas from scratch. Which is
horribly ineﬀective, even if all you care about is art. Doing research allows you to be
more creative, since you get more ideas bouncing oﬀ each other. And if you choose to
invoke poetic license, ignoring a particular fact, you can do so from a position of
strength, knowing that the fact wasn't really essential to your point, or that it allowed
you to emphasize a more important fact instead.
This is all the more important when you're creating something for rationalists, who are
going to pick apart your story and identify everything you get wrong.
The most powerful elements of the evening came from reading I did in the last few
weeks. I hadn't even intended it as a solstice party when I ﬁrst conceived it - it was
just going to be a fun Lovecraft caroling party. The solstice, and Stonehenge in
particular, turned out to be powerful symbols that supplied a concrete narrative. This
was important, because vague symbols like "light" and "darkness" and "life" and
"death" are so overused that you need a real, compelling story for them to feel
meaningful. If I had just run with my initial idea, the result wouldn't have been worth
posting on this site.
Manage Complexity
There's a proverb you may have heard: "A designer achieves perfection, not when
there is nothing left to add, but when there is nothing left to take away."
As you research and develop ideas, those ideas will accumulate and grow more
complex. This will happen for individual pieces, and it will happen to the work as a
whole. The problem is that there's a limit to how much complexity people can handle.
The consequences vary from artform to artform. In the case of a ceremony, songs can
be too challenging to sing, and stories can get too wordy or long.
Sometimes, you may want twenty verses for a song to communicate a complex idea.
You may want interesting harmonies or modulations that make it really beautiful. Your
audience may even be able to handle it - the complexity can be worth it.
BUT. Just because your participants can handle one complex song does not mean they
can handle 30 in a row. You need to make each piece as simple as it can be, so you
have leftover complexity to use in more important places. This means you may need
to revise some songs - even songs you really like, cutting out perfectly good lines that
just weren't quite pulling their weight, so that you could aﬀord to make another, more
important section lengthier or more interesting.

Communal songs are not like regular song. They must be easy to sing. They should
have a refrain that everyone can easily join in on even if they get lost. Ideally, the
lyrics should be someone "obvious" so that people naturally end up singing the right
words even if they aren't paying attention.
I ended up have 2-3 "hard" songs, another 2-3 "medium" songs, and the rest were
deliberately less interesting but easier.
The Sequence readings were the most challenging part of this. I had to ﬁgure out
which elements of them were most important and drastically cut them apart, while
preserving the original impact of Eliezer's work.
Field Testing
No amount of planning can replace actual empirical testing. Unfortunately, pieces of
rituals can't really be tested in isolation. By itself, a single activity can have a
completely diﬀerent feel compared to when you're in the middle of a long ceremony,
light sources ﬂickering and surrounded by friends. On top of this, it's impractical to
hold a "practice" ceremony, since it'd make the "real" ceremony feel repetitive.
But at least some amount of practice can be valuable. If you're writing new songs, or
if you're going to be giving a speech: Record yourself performing, and play it back. An
iPhone's voice memo app is a good way to do this. Not only will this give you vocal
practice, but you'll know how long a piece is, and you may be surprised at how
something actually sounds compared to how it sounded in your head. (I sang some
songs for weeks, carefully tuning them, until the day I actually recorded myself and
realized a bunch of obvious problems I had been ignoring)
You'll want at least some practice getting other people to participate. Getting people
to try out a song by itself can feel a little awkward, but I managed a decent test at a
meetup. I started by asking people to suggest songs they liked that were on-theme.
We played them on youtube, and sang along karaoke style. This got everyone's
energy up, which gave me more conﬁdence to try singing unfamiliar songs I had
written, without musical backup. I learned important information about what people
had an easy time singing along with and what they didn't. People also got a lot more
excited about the event. A lot of the songs people suggested made great additions to
the ﬁnal ceremony.
I had another important source of information from earlier in the year - the NYC had
also done a Rationalist Seder in the spring. This actually had the opposite emotional
arc than what I was going for - wine drinking is built into the Seder, and it becomes
more jovial over time. I wanted things to start jovial, but then turn very dark before
they eventually became uplifting. So I kept the dinner and singing sections separate.
Those who drank during dinner were particularly jubilant at the beginning, but sober
by the time we reached the parts that were intentionally grim.
One thing I did NOT test was use of light sources, which turned out to be a very
complex logistical problem. More on this later.
Remember (and Re-Evaluate) your Goal
As you work on individual sections, it can be easy to forget your original goal.
Remember that each piece isn't just there to be awesome - it's there to produce an
awesome overall composition.

It's also okay if your goal changes - mine went from "silly Lovecraft caroling" to
"serious (trans)humanist ceremony" to something in between, as I gained more data. I
cut out all the Lovecraft when it seemed unnecessary, and then added chunks back in
when I realized there was some genuinely interesting stuﬀ worth including. But every
now and again, I made sure to step from the work, and look at the whole. Every piece
there needed to contribute to a coherent vision, even if that vision was diﬀerent than
the one I started with. Don't let your personal attachments to ideas blind you -
anything that isn't pulling its weight should be changed or cut.
Finally, do at least one read of the entire script, to check how long it is. Don't rely on
this for information on the emotional arc (it will be very diﬀerent when you're reading
by yourself than celebrating in a group) but try and get a general sense of the ﬂow.
My Results
So, how did my event actually go?
I'm going to recommend you take a break now, and go read the actual extended
edition and form your own opinion, before you read my self-critique. And maybe just
take a while in general. This article is long, and I don't think it quite warrants two
separate articles to split into. A breather may be good.
...
Okay. Back?
I actually answered this in a comment in the original post - I wanted to be upfront
about the good and bad things, right oﬀ the bat. Here's the original comment:
1. The party was absolutely worth doing, even if it were just for general warmth,
fun and togetherness
2. I did not personally achieve the profound feeling I was hoping for at the event in
particular. But I did achieve it several times over while I was planning it, and I
think I burned out on profundity before I actually got to the night in question. It
was also warped somewhat by performance anxiety. I didn't actually feel like a
participant in the event - I felt like a performer, and to some extent a scientist
observing a phenomenon. I think that was mostly unique to me, although it will
probably apply to anyone putting the event together for the ﬁrst time.
3. So far I've spoken to a few other participants after the fact. Reactions seem to
range based on how susceptible you are in general to warm fuzzies (more
importantly, what I've come to call "warm shivers"). Everyone seems
enthusiastic about doing it again, and most people seemed to have at least one
moment that touched them, but diﬀerent people reacted strongly to diﬀerent
parts of the evening.
4. A fairly common reaction was "this was a great idea and a good execution, but I
have a strong sense that MUCH more is possible." (This was my reaction as well)
Some new information I've gathered since then:
5) I set up an anonymous feedback box on our mailing list, to address conformity
issues. I only got two comments there, one was a person who didn't attend who was
concerned about cult-image in general, and one was speciﬁcally concerned about the
Singularity song, which I'm still reconsidering for next year.

6) There was a little too much Lovecraft. This was my fault - it was something I
personally liked, which I should have been more careful not to overemphasize. In the
ﬁnal, extended edition of the ritual book, I removed excess Lovecraft and replaced it
with other things.
7) Some mistakes were due to time constraints. The ﬁrst ﬁve songs were not very
good - they were pre-existing Lovecraft songs that I got oﬀ the internet. I deliberately
allowed those songs to not be very good, because I knew that when the singing
started, people would still be getting the hang of it. I had limited time to prepare and
focused on the important parts. I've altered or replaced some of the early songs in the
extended edition, but they are still deliberately less important.
8) A few people reported that I (successfully) made them almost cry during the dark
sections, but that I didn't have enough uplifting songs to ﬁnish it oﬀ.
9) Relatedly, the lynchpin song, "Brighter Than Today," which I wrote for the transition
from dark to light, is rather complicated to sing. I'm on the fence of whether I should
make it simpler, or just allow the transitional anthem to be complex and expect
people to get better at singing it over time. I think it would lose some power if I made
it a more communal-friendly song. Diﬀerent participants have given me diﬀerent
opinions on this.
10) Light sources turned out to be complicated. Partly because we just forgot to turn
them oﬀ. I solved that by including instructions in the actual booklet. Partly because
we didn't bring enough. I'm going to emphasize that more and ensure we have a
better variety. (I left my own Lava Lamp and Lightning Ball at my parent's home and
forgot them). But there was a harder problem that I don't know how to solve:
Each light source should feel dramatic when it turns oﬀ. Which essentially means that
each light should be among the more "powerful" remaining lights. A single candle
getting snuﬀed out is irrelevant when all the lights are on, but powerful when it's the
last light remaining.
But there's only so many lights you can turn oﬀ before it becomes hard to read. This
*could* be solved by using "True" communal songs - songs designed so you can ﬁgure
them out and sing along without any text at all. But those songs tend to be louder and
more boisterous. The whole point of the enroaching darkness is to become more grim.
Having more light sources may solve this problem - giving us enough to turn oﬀ while
still having illumination to read by. Yet another part of the problem was a lack of table-
space: there were 20 of us, and we ended up sitting in a circle of chairs. How to
resolve this problem will depend a lot on who's participating, how well they can read
in the dark, and what kind of room/table you have to work with.
11) I went back and forth on "The Gift We Give Tomorrow," and how short I wanted to
make it. It reads like a conversation, and if you have two people who are both familiar
with it, it can probably be okay as a longer piece. But I didn't ﬁnd someone to read it
with me early enough to practice together. So I ended up shortening it dramatically,
cutting out the entire ﬁrst half.
By the time I did this, I had spent three weeks wallowing in existential despair,
studying a lot of grim writings about the cruelty of the universe, and I had basically
lost the ability to discern emotional content. I thought I could get away with cutting
away everything except the "poetic" sections of The Gift. It turns out you shouldn't do
this. It wasn't bad, but it wasn't as potent as it should have been.

Next year I plan on doing the "full" version (i.e the abridged version I posted here),
and just make sure I get someone to practice with.
12) On a related note: make sure you give yourself enough time to work on something
like this. You don't just need time to write it, you need time to take a step back, let
your brain recalibrate so you can properly evaluate sadness and beauty, and then still
be able to revise it for a ﬁnal draft.
Next Year
Last year, I let these ideas gestate for about 8 months before I got serious about
putting this together. This year I'll be planning ahead a lot more. I'll also be setting
some other things in motion, that may interact with the Solstice celebration in ways I
can't predict just yet. (Among other things, possibly getting a much cooler space to
conduct it in)
I aim to have found or written more and better songs, possibly replacing some of the
less on-theme ones that I included this year. I hope to collaborate more with trained
musicians, do more research, and improve my own design skills. I have some speciﬁc
thoughts on how to address existing problems, but those may radically change as I
explore new possibilities.
I also plan to have networked with other local humanist, skeptical and rational
communities. I don't know if the end result will be a larger Less Wrong NYC community
(having found people who'd naturally gravitate to our memes), a stronger coalition of
Less Wrong communities beyond NYC, or a less speciﬁc coalition of
rational/skeptical/humanist groups. Satisfying the needs of multiple tribes may water
down your values, but I think we can ﬁnd plenty of things in common with related
groups of people. Depending on the direction I go in, next year's Solstice may be
mostly the same or radically diﬀerent. (I may even hold multiple ones for diﬀerent
target audiences).
I won't be posting about this on Less Wrong - I think this website should mostly focus
on quality technical posts, and I know culture-building can be a turn oﬀ to some. But I
am interested in collaborating with anyone who's interested (and if you're NOT
interested but are slightly scared of what I'm trying to do, I welcome you to keep an
eye on me as a Rationalist Confessor). I'll be starting a mailing list and possibly a
design blog relating to this. Send me a PM if you're interested.
And if you're not really interested the large-scale culture building, but wanted some
inspiration for your own community, Less Wrong or otherwise, I hope I helped.

Clumping Solstice Singalongs in
Groups of 2-4
This post assumes you're familiar with rationalist solstice. (It also assumes that while
yes, ritual is something to be epistemically careful about, the overall eﬀect size is
relatively small compared to spending much of your life thinking about a topic with
peers that think that topic is important, and meanwhile having community identities is
valuable. If you want to debate that please do so on one of those previous posts)
If you run a solstice ceremony with singalongs, there's particular value in:
Doing at least 16 singalongs
Clumping* them together in groups of 2-4, rather than alternating song / story /
song / story. (Clumping is valuable even if you are doing a smaller number of
songs)
This isn't the right approach for all possible solstice aesthetics, but there's a magic
thing that can happen here if you do. And if you're not doing it (i.e. most solstice
organizers seem to default to the "story/song/story/song" thing), you won't receive
any feedback that there's a diﬀerent thing you could do with a magic, synergistic
outcome.
Reasons to want more songs, and to cluster them in groups of 2-4:
It takes people awhile to get comfortable singing.
Context switching makes it harder to get into the headspace of singing.
There is a secret, deeper headspace of singing that you only get to if you do a
LOT of it, in a row, in an environment that encourages being thoroughly un-self-
conscious about it.
There is a long game that I think singalong solstice celebrations can help with,
which is to restore musicality as a basic skill, which in turn allows you to have
much richer musical traditions than if it's an incidental thing you do a little of
sometimes. The payoﬀ for this comes on a multi-year timescale.
There are reasons not to want this many songs, or to have them clustered this way.
Some people get more value out of the speeches or other activities than songs. One
organizer of a small solstice mentioned their primary concern was "Have each person
bring one activity to the solstice", and most of them weren't comfortable with
songleading. Getting people directly involved with Solstice indeed seems valuable if
that's an option. (This makes more sense for smaller communities)
But my impression is that much of the time, the ratio of songs/stories and their
placement was determined somewhat arbitrarily, and then never reconsidered.
Getting Comfortable
It used to be that group singing was quite common. There were no iPods or
headphones, or even recordings. Running into a 1-in-a-million musician was a rare
event. Therefore, it was quite natural that if you wanted music in your life, you had to

make it yourself, and when you did you were comparing yourself to your friends and
family, not to popular superstars.
This is no longer the case by default. So it takes people awhile to get used to "oh,
okay I am actually allowed to sing. I am actually encouraged to sing. It doesn't matter
if I sound good, we are doing this thing together."
For many people, it takes at least two songs in a row to get them to a point where
they even consider singing at all, let alone feeling good about it. The feeling of
hesitation resets when you spend a lot of time listening to a speech.
The idea here is not just "people get to sing", but, "people feel a deep reassurance
that singing is okay, that we are all here singing together", and I think that's just
impossible to get in the space of one or even two songs. (It becomes even harder to
hit this point if there are proportionately few singalongs, and especially if there are
also performance-piece songs that people are not encouraged to sing along with)
Deep musical headspace
In my preferred celebration, "Deep reassurance that singing is okay" is only step one.
There's a second deeper stage of feeling connected to the other people in the room,
and connected to ideas that you're all here to celebrate, for which reassurance is a
prerequisite but insuﬃcient.
Step two requires the songs be resonant, and for you to have a strong sense that the
other people in the room all have a particular connection to the songs. (The sense of
ingroup identity and sense of philosophical connection are separate qualities, but work
together to produce something greater than the sum of their parts)
You can get pieces of this in the space of a single song, but there's a version of it with
unique qualia that takes something like 8 songs to really get going (and then, once
you're there, it's nice to get to stay there awhile)
Interwoven Story and Song; each Round Deepening
The formula I ﬁnd works best (at least for my preferences) is:
On average, groups of 2-4 songs
Start with a song that's a particularly inviting singalong, to set the overall
context of "this is an event where we're here to sing together."
Each song gets a brief story (like 10-30 seconds) that gives it some context and
helps people ﬁt it into the overall narrative arc of the night. The brief stories are
not long enough to take you out of singalong-headspace.
In between sets of 2-4 songs, there are longer stories, speeches, meditations
and other activities that move the narrative along more signiﬁcantly. Each one
sets the overall context for the next 2-4 songs, shifting the particular qualia of
"deep singalong" that you'd get from it.
Once you've gotten into the overall singalong headspace, it's less necessary to do
groups of songs - alternating between a song and a speech won't kill the headspace
once it's had a chance to take root.
Your Mileage May Vary

Reiterating a ﬁnal time that this is just one particular eﬀect you can go for. I think it's
important that local solstice organizers adapt to ﬁt the needs of their particular
communities. But the eﬀect I'm trying to describe here is hard to grok if you haven't
directly experienced it, and I wanted people to at least have considered an option they
may have been missing.

Ritual Report 2012: Life, Death, Light,
Darkness, and Love.
One winter ago, twenty aspiring rationalists gathered in a room, ate some food, sang
some songs, and lit some candles. We told some stories about why the universe is the
way it is, and what kind of people we want to be.
I wrote some things about the experience. But here's a fairly succinct description:
 
Like most things, winter was once a mystery.
The world got cold, and dark. Life became fragile. People died. And they didn't
know what was happening or understand why. They desperately threw festivals in
honor of sun gods with all-too-human motivations, and prayed for the light's
return.
It didn't help. Though we did discover that throwing parties in the middle of winter
is an excellent idea.
But then something incredible and beautiful happened. We studied the sky. We
invented astronomy, and other sciences. We began a long journey towards truly
understanding our place in the universe. And we used that knowledge to plan for
the future, and make our world better. Five thousand years later, the winter isn't
so scary. But the symbol of the solstice - the departure and return of the sun - is
still powerful. The work we have done to transform winter from a terrifying season
of darkness into a modern festival of light deserves a reverence with all the weight
of an ancient cultural cornerstone.
Last year, we had fun. A few people reported being emotionally aﬀected. By and large,
though, the dominant conclusion was "This was good ﬁrst eﬀort, but much, much
more is possible." In truth, I considered it a dress rehearsal, more a proof-of-concept
than a ﬁnished product. I spent the last year working to do something better, but
worried that I wouldn't be able to. That maybe people don't create holidays from
scratch that actually latch on because it's just damn hard to do and I wouldn't be up
to it.
And I was worried that either I wouldn't be able to make the experience as grim and
intense as I wanted, or that I'd succeed, but then not be able to lift people back out of
it. This was a problem for some people last year, and last year I didn't push things
nearly as dark as I was planning to this time.
I worried that even if I succeeded at creating the experience for other people, I
wouldn't be able to experience it myself. A year ago, I didn't feel like a participant. I
felt like an anthropologist - clinically detached from the bonding ritual I had created.
But six months ago, four friends and I acquired a large, three story house named
"Winterfell." And one week ago, ﬁfty people squeezed into that house to celebrate
humanity. The house seems a lot smaller once you crammed ﬁfty people into the
living room. But we managed to ﬁt.

And then...  I feel a desire to maintain some kind of modesty here, but honestly, I
spent a year stressing about this and I think I'm just going to say that it went
beautifully. 
Not perfectly - nothing is ever perfect, and now more than ever it is clear how much
more is possible with this endeavor. Yvain wrote a pretty good review of which parts
went well and which parts needed work. But I got emphatic gratitude from people who
had been merely lukewarm about it last year.
In the darkest section of the evening, people cried, and held each other, and I was one
of them. And I was one of them as we watched time lapse footage of the stars from
the international space station, and sang about a tomorrow that could be brighter
than today.
 
This will be the ﬁrst post of another short mini-sequence (either one or two additional
posts elaborating on the design process, what comes next and what I'm concerned
about). For now, I'll just note the one biggest ﬂaw with this years was that it was too
long. (Last years was too short, and I decided to err on the side of "test a bunch of
ideas at once" so that future Solstices could settle into an ideal, traditional state
faster).
I would like to note that I want to strongly encourage people who are weirded out by
this to speak out (if for no other reason than to be counted as people who are turned
oﬀ by it). If you have speciﬁc negative consequences beyond a vague dislike of the
idea, I'd like you to articulate them, after looking through my post from last year - The
Value and Danger of Ritual.
Below is a link to the 2012 Ritual Book, and a collection of links to online media for the
songs and videos that we listened to and watched during the event, which you can
follow along with as you read to get something (vaguely) resembling the actual
experience. (Plus side - you'll get to experience higher quality of music performance.
Downside - you miss on the warm experience of singing with a group of people).
I couldn't ﬁnd links for all the songs, but there should be enough to give you the idea. 
 
2012 Solstice Ritual Book
First Litany of Tarski - If the sky is blue....
Why Does the Sun Shine (part 0)
The Grinch
Necronomicon
The X Days of X-Risk
Ballad of Bonnie the Em
Second Litany of Tarski - If I'm going to be outcompeted by simulated minds in a
Malthusian Hellhole race to the bottom...
Mindspace is Deep and Wide
One Wish (I found a Baby Genie)
Build That Wall

Quantum Entanglement
Third Litany of Tarski - If the Many Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics is
true...
When I Die
Why Does the Sun Shine (part 1)
God Wrote the Sky
Blue Skies
Metalitany of Tarski - If reciting the Litany of Tarski is useful...
Beyond the Reach of God
Blowin' In the Wind
Stonehenge (The Sun is Going to Go)
Gods Ain't Gonna Catch Ya (slightly altered lyrics)
Take My Love, Take My Land (Mal's Song)
Collect a Little Echo
The Drummer's Little Boy
No One is Alone (dramatically abridged)
Serenity'
Gift We Give Tomorrow
Moment of Darkness
A View From Above - Time Lapse Footage from the International Space Station
Brighter Than Today
Still Alive
Lean on Me
A Still Small Voice
Gonna be a Cyborg
Move the World
What a Wonderful World
Seasons of Love
The Sun's a Miasma of Incandescent Plasma (altered lyrics for singability)
Forever Young (*slightly* altered lyrics)
Uplift
Final Litany - If human values will survive for ﬁve thousand years...
Five Thousand Years  (Sun is Gonna Go, Reprise) A Brief Recap (Our Story in 1
minute and 30 seconds)The Road to Wisdom

Solstice 2015: What Memes May
Come? (Part I)
Winter is coming, and so is Solstice season. There'll be large rationality-centric-or-
adjaecent events in NYC, the Bay Area, and Seattle (and possibly other places - if
you're interested in running a Solstice event or learning what that involves, send me a
PM). In NYC, there'll be a general megameetup throughout the weekend, for people
who want to stay through Sunday afternoon, and if you're interested in shared
housing you can ﬁll out this form.
The NYC Solstice isn't running a kickstarter this year, but I'll need to pay for the venue
by November 19th ($6125). So if you are planning on coming it's helpful to purchase
tickets sooner rather than later. (Or preorder the next album or 2016 Book of
Traditions, if you can't attend but want to support the event).
-
I've been thinking for the past couple years about the Solstice as a memetic payload.
The Secular Solstice is a (largely Less Wrong inspired) winter holiday, celebrating how
humanity faced the darkest season and transformed it into a festival of light. It
celebrates science and civilization. It honors the past, revels in the present and
promises to carry our torch forward into the future.
For the ﬁrst 2-3 years, I had a fair amount of inﬂuences over the Solstices held in
Boston and San Francisco, as well as the one I run in NYC. Even then, the holiday has
evolved in ways I didn't quite predict. This has happened both because diﬀerent
communities took them in somewhat diﬀerent directions, and because (even in the
events I run myself), factors come into play that shaped it. Which musicians are
available to perform, and how does their stage presence aﬀect the event? Which
people from which communities will want to attend, and how will their energy aﬀect
things? Which jokes will they laugh at? What will they ﬁnd poignant?
On top of that, I'm deliberately trying to spread the Solstice to a larger audience.
Within a couple years, if I succeed, more of the Solstice will be outside of my control
than within it. 
Is it possible to steer a cultural artifact into the future, even after you let go of the
reins? How? Would you want to?
In this post, I lay out my current thoughts on this matter. I am interested in feedback,
collaboration and criticism.
Lessons from History?
(Epistemic status: I have not really fact checked this. I wouldn't be surprised if the
example turned out to be false, but I think it illustrates an interesting point regardless
of whether it's true)

Last year after Solstice, I was speaking with a rationalist friend with a Jewish
background. He made an observation. I lack the historical background to know if this
is exactly accurate (feel free to weigh in on the comments), but his notion was as
follows:
Judaism has inﬂuenced the world in various direct ways. But a huge portion of its
inﬂuence (perhaps the majority) has been indirectly through Christianity. Christianity
began with a few ideas it took from Judaism that were relatively rare. Monotheism is
one example. The notion that you can turn to the Bible for historical and theological
truth is another.
But buried in that second point is something perhaps more important: religious truth is
not found in the words of your tribal leaders and priests. It's found in a book. The book
contains the facts-of-the-matter. And while you can argue cleverly about the book's
contents, you can't disregard it entirely.
Empiricists may get extremely frustrated with creationists, for refusing to look
outside their book for answers (instead of the natural world). But there was a point
where the fact of the matter lay entirely in "what the priests/ruler said" as opposed to
"what the book said". 
In this view, Judaism's primary memetic success is in helping to seed the idea of
scholarship, and a culture of argument and discussion.
I suspect this story is simpliﬁed, but these two points seem meaningful: a memeplex's
greatest impact may be indirect, and may not have much to do with the attributes
that are most salient on ﬁrst glance to a layman.
 
Simplicity
So far, I've deliberately encouraged people to experiment with the Solstice. Real
rituals evolve in the wild, and adapt to the needs of their community. And a major risk
of ritual is that it becomes ossiﬁed, turning either hollow or dangerous. But if a ritual is
designed to be mutable, what gives it it's identity? What separates a Secular Solstice
from a generic humanist winter holiday?
The simplest, most salient and most fun aspects of a ritual will probably spread the
fastest and farthest. If I had to sum up the Solstice in nine words, they would be:
Light. Darkness. Light.
Past. Present. Future.
Humanity. Science. Civilization.
I suspect that without any special eﬀort on my part (assuming I keep promoting the
event but don't put special eﬀort into steering its direction), those 9 pieces would
remain a focus of the event, even if groups I never talk to adopt it for themselves.
The most iconic image of the Solstice is the Candelit story. At the apex of the event,
when all lights but a single candle have been extinguished, somebody tells a story
that feels personal, visceral. It reminds us that this world can be unfair, but that we

are not alone, and we have each other. And then the candle is blown out, and we
stand in the absolute darkness together.
If any piece of the Solstice survives, it'll be that moment.
If that were all that survived, I think that'd be valuable. But it'd also be leaving 90%+
of the potential value of the Solstice on the table.
Complex Value
There are several pieces of the Solstice that are subtle and important. There are also
pieces of it that currently exist that should probably be tapered down, or adjusted to
become more useful. Each of them warrants a fairly comprehensive post of its own. A
rough overview of topics to explore:
Atheism.
Rationality.
Death.
Humanism.
Transhumanism.
Existential Risk.
The Here and Now.
The Distant Future.
My thoughts about each of these are fairly complex. In the coming weeks I'll dive into
each of them. The next post, discussing Atheism, Rationality and Death, is here.

Solstice 2015: What Memes May Come
(Part II - Atheism, Rationality and
Death)
Winter is coming, and so is Solstice season. There'll be large rationality-centric-or-
adjaecent events in NYC, the Bay Area, and Seattle(and possibly other places - if
you're interested in running a Solstice event or learning what that involves, send me a
PM). In NYC, there'll be a general megameetup throughout the weekend, for people
who want to stay through Sunday afternoon, and if you're interested in shared
housing you can ﬁll out this form.
The NYC Solstice isn't running a kickstarter this year, but I'll need to pay for the venue
by November 19th ($6125). So if you are planning on coming it's helpful to purchase
tickets sooner rather than later. (Or preorder the next album or 2016 Book of
Traditions, if you can't attend but want to support the event).
-
This is the second post in the Solstice 2015 sequence, discussing plans and musings
on the potential cultural impact of the Solstice. The ﬁrst post was here. 
This explores the Solstice's relationship with Atheism, Rationality, and Death.
Atheism
Some may be surprised that I don't consider atheism particularly core to the Solstice.
This probably will remain a part of it for the forseeable future. Atheists happen to be
the demographic most hungry for some kind of meaningful winter traditions. And
Beyond the Reach of God, a powerful essay that (often) plays an important role in the
holiday, happens to frame it's argument around the non-existence of God.
But this doesn't actually seem especially inevitable or necessary. Beyond the Reach of
God *isn't* about God, per se (at least, I don't see it that way). It's about the absolute,
unforgiving neutrality of the laws of physics. It's about all the other sacred things that
even atheists believe in, which they may make excuses for.
I think it's *currently* useful for there to a moment where we acknowledge that there
is no God to bail us out, and that this is really important. But this may not always be
the case. I would be pretty happy if, in 50 years, all references to God were gone from
the Solstice (because the question of God was no longer one that preoccupied our
society in the ﬁrst place), but those crucial points were made in other ways. It can be
a holiday for atheists without being about that in any speciﬁc way.
Rationality
It's common throughout the secular world to speak highly of "rationality." But
oftentimes, what that means in practice is pointing out the mistakes that other people

are making, the fallacies they're committing.
The brand of rationality that spawned the Solstice has a diﬀerent meaning: a speciﬁc
dedication to looking at the way your own mind and beliefs are ﬂawed, and actively
seeking to correct them. Looking for the sacred cows of your culture (be it liberal,
libertarian, academic or otherwise) and ﬁguring out how they have blinded you.
Rationality is... sort of a central theme, but in an understated way. It underlies
everything going on in the event, but hasn't really been a central character.
This might be a mistake. In particular because rationality's role is very subtle, and
easy to be missed. Axial Tilt is the reason for the season, not crazy sun gods. But the
reason that's important is a larger principle: that beliefs are entangled, that habits of
excuse-making for outdated beliefs can be dangerous -- and that this can apply not
just to antiquated beliefs about sun gods but (more importantly) to your current
beliefs about politics and ﬁnance and love and relationships.
Aesthetically, in a culture of rationalists, I think it's correct for "rationality" to be very
understated at the Solstice - there are plenty of other times to dwell upon it. But since
Solstice is going to get promoted outside of the culture that spawned it, it's possible it
may be best to include songs or stories that make it's epistemic core more explicit, so
as not to be forgotten. It would be very easy for the Solstice to become about making
fun of religion, and that is very much not my goal.
 
This year I have a story planned that will end up putting this front and center, but that
won't make for a very good "permanent" feature of the Solstice. I'm interested in
people's comments on how to address that in a more longterm way.
Death
I think one of the most valuable elements of the Solstice is the way it addresses'
death. Atheists or "nones" don't really have a centralized funeral culture, and this can
actually be a problem - it means that when someone dies, you suddenly have to
scramble to put together an event that feels earnest and true, that helps you grapple
with one of life's harshest events, and many people are too overwhelmed to ﬁgure out
how to do so.
Funerals, more than any kind of secular ceremony, beneﬁt from prior ritualization - a
set of clear instructions on what to do that feel familiar and comfortable. It's the not
the time to experiment with novel, crazy ideas, even genuinely good ones.
So Solstice provides a venue to test out pieces of funeral ritual, and let the good
ones become familiar. It also provides a time, in the interim, for people who haven't
had the chance to grieve properly because their loved one's funeral was theistic-by-
default.
I think for this to work optimally, it needs to be a bit more deliberate. There's a lot of
death-centric songs in the Solstice (probably more than there should be), but
relatively few that actually feel appropriate for a funeral. I'd like to look for
opportunities to do things more directly-funeral-relevant, while still appropriate for the
overall Solstice arc.

There's also a deeper issue here: secular folk vary wildly in how they relate to death.
Some people are looking for a way to accept it. Other people think the very idea of
accepting death is appalling.
Common Ground
I have my own opinions here, and I'll dive a bit more deeply into this in my next post.
But for now, I'll just note that I want to help shape a funeral culture that does feel
distinctive, with traditions that feel at least a little oddly speciﬁc (to avoid a sort of
generic, store-brand feel), but which also strike a kind of timeless, universal chord.
Funerals are a time when wildly disparate friends and family need to come together
and ﬁnd common ground.
When my grandmother died, I went to a Catholic mass. Two hundred people spoke in
unison "our father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name." The words themselves
meant very little, but the fact that two hundred people who speak them ﬂawlessly
together felt very meaningful to me. And I imagine it'd have been even more
meaningful, if I believed in them.
In the secular world, not everyone's into chanting things as a group. But it still seems
to me that having words that are familiar to you, which you can at least listen
together and know that two hundred people also ﬁnd them meaningful, could be very
important.
Now, humanity has certainly not lacked for beautiful poetry surrounding death. Nor
even beautiful non-supernatural poetry surrounding death. Nor even beautiful poetry-
surrounding-death-that-matches-you-(yes-you)-'re-speciﬁc-worldview-surrounding-
death. But what it does seem to be lacking is are well-known cultural artifacts that a
wide array of people would feel comforted by, in a very primal way.
There's a particular poem that's meaningful to me. There's another poem (very
similar, both relating to the turning of the seasons and our changing relationship with
the seasons of over time), that's meaningful to my girlfriend. But they're just diﬀerent
enough that neither would be feel safe and familiar to both of us, in the event of
someone's death.
So something I'd like to do with the Solstice, is to coordinate (across all Solstices,
across the nation, and perhaps in other holidays and events) to ﬁnd words or activities
to share, that can become well known enough that everyone at a funeral could feel
united.
An actionable question:
In particular, I think I'm looking for a poem (not intended to be the only element-
addressing-death in the Solstice, but one that has a shot at widespread
adoption),  with a few qualities:
 - Short enough (or with a simple refrain) that people can speak it aloud together.
 - Whether metaphorical or not, hints at a theme of relating to memories and the
preserving thereof. (I think this is something most worldviews can relate to)
 - All things being equal, something fairly commonly known.
 - Since everyone's going to want their own favorite poem to be the one adopted,
people interested in this problem should try applying some meta-cooperative-

considerations - what do you wish other people with their own favorite poems were
doing to try and settle on this?
If you have either suggestions for a poetic contender, or disagreements with my
thought process here, let me know!
-
In the next (probably ﬁnal) post of this mini-sequence, I'll be talking about Humanism,
Transhumanism, and the Far Future.

The Summer Solstice Paradox
In which I call something a paradox that, like most "paradoxes", isn't really. But is
nonetheless a confusing problem.
After every Winter Solstice I've run, I get people asking me "so what's for Summer
Solstice?" It seems like an obvious question - clearly the Winter Solstice is just a small
piece of a much larger puzzle. One holiday does not a culture make. And on the
ﬂipside, it's helpful to build oﬀ of something already familiar. So a Summer Solstice
feels like the obvious next step... right?
Honestly, that doesn't feel right to me.
What are holidays for again?
Holidays serve a few key purposes - they connect us to our community, they connect
us to ideas. Depending on their nature, they may give us an excuse to celebrate and
have fun, or they may give us an excuse to be calm and contemplative. The
generalized case of this is "give us an excuse to have an experience that society
doesn't normally encourage us to have."
Used to be, there wasn't a giant economy churning out more novel things to entertain
us than we could ever possibly consume. Used to be, you had more or less one culture
per-town, and your community ran a few big holidays per year.
Then we started having melting-pot ("salad bowl?") metropolitan centers where we
had lots of diﬀerent cultures clashing, along with more and more
people/companies/movements churning out novel experiences.[1] Now there are huge
numbers of big parades, live-action theater events, conferences about art and
science, a dozen new movies each week, as well as numerous small meetups catering
to random niche interests.
The positive side is we get access to all these experiences. The downside is that we
may lose access to the particular experience "my entire tribe is coming together to
celebrate this thing we all care deeply about."
Humanist culture has the potential to ﬁll that void. But to successfully do that, it needs
to create something people go to instead of all the other fun, exciting experiences
that already exist.
The Brighter Than Today Solstice was successful because it was doing something that
literally wasn't being done - creating a holiday experience that had a story, had good
original music and good art that tied together to create a deliberate experience. It
also wasn't afraid to get dark and explore sadness.
The Summer Solstice Paradox
Winter feels like a time of huddling in the darkness, drawing people close. I want to be
reminded that the light will return, that I'm not alone.

Summer... I just want to enjoy the light. June 22nd, I just want to be out in the woods
with friends, having a picnic or throwing a frisbee.
You could make a Summer Solstice that deliberately echoed the Brighter-Than-Today-
style Winter Solstice - have a big outdoor music festival that celebrates being
alive alongside reason and human achievement. But really, I'd rather my Summer
Solstice just be fun, and if we're just doing fun, it's not something that really *needs*
to be uniquely humanist. There are already outdoor music festivals and parties.
The people running those have years of experience, they are better at it than I am,
and any unique spins I've thought of so far to put on it feel a bit awkward and forced.
(If you are good at running that sort of event, by all means run a humanist-focused
version of it, but most humanist organizers I know aren't experienced festival
organizers as well).
More generally - I'm not sure that the Solstice/Equinox framework makes for the best
wheel of the year, especially if we're trying to set something in motion that'll weather
the sands of time. Most places on the globe have some form of winter - even if
doesn't have life threatening cold, it typically at least has an encroaching darkness
that makes for a potent symbol. But not as many regions have as distinct an autumn
or spring. And four "Big" holidays seems to be asking for a lot of limited cultural
attention.
But, still. One holiday seems overly minimalist.  So, what to do?
I do have some ideas I'm still mulling over. But ﬁrst, I'd like to pose the question to
people here. Think for a moment about how many holidays you actually want in a
given year. Think about what you'd actually want to experience, when you want to
experience, how busy you're likely to be at that time of year and what it'd likely be
competing with for your attention.
What do you want out of a humanist holiday year?
-
[1] I'm not actually certain I'm getting the history quite right here. One bug/feature of
the rationalist community is that I start (correctly) second guessing everything I think I
know, which means I feel obligated to do lots of research before I make any claims,
which means I feel paralyzed and don't actually get around to writing. But meanwhile,
there DO clearly seem to be states of the world that need ﬁxing, which requires
writing stuﬀ that motivates people. 
My current strategy is "do minimal research on wikipedia to make sure I'm not grossly
wrong about my claims about history, holidays and ritual, and then go ahead and
write the damn blogpost.

Visions of Summer Solstice
Previously:
Winter Solstice
The Summer Solstice Paradox
The Steampunk Aesthetic
i. Oﬀ the beaten path
See the light as it shines on the sea? It's blinding
But no one knows how deep it goes
- How Far I'll Go, Moana
The experience begins with a journey.
This partly by design, but largely by necessity.
Winter Solstice is about the long arc of history. Summer Solstice is about the here and
now, and why being human is something worth protecting. It's about freedom, fun,
physicality. It's about ﬁguring things out in Near Mode. It's about building things
together.
Getting a particular kind of Special out of that physicality requires a particular kind of
space.
It's not enough to ﬁnd a small nearby park. Ideally, you want an outdoor space vast
enough to feel in your bones that the sky is the limit. There is no one and nothing to
help you build a tower to the stars, or to cross the ocean, or cartwheel forever in any
direction. But neither is there anyone to stop you. There is only nature, and you, and
your tribe, and whatever you choose to do.
If you live in a major city, this probably means you may need to undertake a nontrivial
journey before ﬁnding such a place. The best places will be oﬀ the beaten path, and a
bit hard to navigate to. If it were easy, humans would have already crowded around it.
You might be able to have fun, but you wouldn't be able to carve out a spot for your
people to invoke a Sacred Fun.
As you contemplate this from your comfortable couch and think about the journey,
you may ﬁnd it daunting. If you attempted it alone, you might ﬁnd it frustrating and
lonely.
So, don't attempt it alone.
Journey together. If you get lost along the way, getting un-lost is part of the fun. You
may ﬁnd something valuable in overcoming the obstacles. I do, anyway.
The best journey is one that borders on the mythologic - you pass through narrow
passages, winding your way through wild undergrowth, slightly confused about where
you are going but compelled onwards by curiosity. You cross a threshold into a fae-like
enclave that clear communicates "you have left the default world behind."

And then suddenly ﬁnd yourself at the top (or edge) of the world, slightly unclear how
you got there.
Sometimes you are lucky, and such hidden enclaves exist right in your backyard. But
the eﬃcient Other World hypothesis says that such unspoiled passages are rare.
There are many possible destinations you can choose for your journey. I suggest one
additional constraint: As much as possible, ﬁnd a low horizon line - a beach, or hilltop.
Dense foliage is beautiful in it's own way, but there is something valuable, for this
holiday, about getting a clear view of the sunset.
You are here to celebrate the longest day of the year.
ii. Build a sacred space for your tribe
Ultimately, you are here for embodied fun. Build sandcastles. Fly kites. Wrestle. Play
foot-to-face. Run barefoot in the sand. Cook together. Eat together. Go swimming.
Climb things. Sing songs as you hike the local trails.
The border between ritual and non-ritual can be subtle. You can do all those things,
and have it be a simple day-of-fun with no special signiﬁcance. You can do all those
things, and choose to imbue it with transformative, symbolic power. The power is
greater if it involves sacriﬁce. The sacriﬁce is more potent if it is resonant - a costly
signal, but not an arbitrary one.
You are here to become - or to remind yourself that you are - a tribe.
And there is something special about building something together, greater than any of
you could have built on your own, to make this fact true in your gut.
There are diﬀerent aesthetics you can bring to this. Last year, the NYC community
journeyed to Long Island, near some old ruins, and built a temple of heavy driftwood
logs that nobody could have even lifted on their own.
In the Bay Area, folk organized a giant dome build. Less primeval, more steampunk. A
couple dozen people worked in tandem, half of them holding up a 50 foot, 600 pound
sphere of steel while others darted around tightening bolts. If anyone had fucked up,
the whole thing would come tumbling down. Then they hung silks and put a
trampoline in it.
Whether primeval, steampunk or otherwise, the key is cooperation, and to fully
engage the human experience. Solve physics puzzles that are not just about thinking

at a computer screen, but which require you to be embodied. Sensory Experience.
High challenge. Living by your own strength.
Then, take a step back, and marvel at the monument you have built to yourselves,
and the space you have created.
And play.
The 2017 Bay Summer Solstice Dome
iii. Winter is Coming
That all seemed well and good to me. It was the plan I and the NYC rationalists went
to Long Island with. But when we got there, and set about building a temple of
driftwood, we were presented with a question:
How should we design our temple, such that it oriented around the longest day. Could
we align it with the sunset?
This was a physics question, and an engineering one.
Where on the horizon, precisely, will the sun set?
With nothing but crude physical tools and the naked eye, could we ﬁgure it out? Could
we do so with enough time left over to erect a set of pillars lining the sun?
And then, it all clicked together.
Winter Solstice celebrates the birth of astronomy - the human ability to look up at the
sky, predict when the seasons will change, plant your grains at the right time, plan for
the coming darkness. The long, slow bootstrapping of humanity. Building the tools that
built the tools that built the tools that built the cities around us. Culminating in the
ability to look out in the universe and know exactly what is going on. To send
machines into space and turn around and see our home, in our obscurity, in all this
vastness, and think "That's here. That's home. That's us." And know that there is no
hint that anyone out there will save us from ourselves.
The ability to look into a murky, uncertain future, and plan.
And now, here we were, actually having to begin that journey ourselves from
something-like-ﬁrst-principles, and it didn't even feel contrived. The connection to
Winter Solstice didn't require any grim speeches or cerebral songs. It just was.

My favorite part: Those pillar we placed?
That was our conﬁdence interval. The more clearly we could predict sunset, the closer
together we could aﬀord to place them. As it turns out, we were oﬀ by about a foot.
But the problem left a number of ways to scale the diﬃculty in future years, building
towards more precision as our skills increased.
The 2017 NYC Summer Solstice temple
iv. Next
Real holidays are not created. They evolve.
- Secular Solstice Hymnal
Right now, the vision depicted above feels approximately like Winter Solstice 2011 -
the broad strokes are there, but a lot of the pieces will require some ﬁnessing, settling
into place, or evolving based on the local needs of your community.
Moreso than Winter Solstice as, Summer Solstice demands an environment of
improvisation and whimsy. It beneﬁts from people bringing cool idea to try out. Do you
know how to ﬁre-twirl? Play guitar? Teach Acro Yoga? Have some random cool outdoor
toy? Go for it, and don't worry overmuch of if it all ﬁts neatly together.
I think plenty of people won't be interested in the Building of the Space, or might want
to contribute their own thing to it, and that's ﬁne. At NYC 2017, some people were
erecting the pillars, or measuring shadows to calculate sunset, while others built sand-
art to go along with it, or just went oﬀ to swim or explore.
I think having at least a small group of people building the central monument helps to
give all the rest of the kite-ﬂying, swimming, climbing, wrestling, barbecue etc an
underlying sense of purpose - a thing that we might come together to do once a year,
to be a tribe together in a way that is in some sense sacred.
Comments can be for both discussing this conception of Summer Solstice, as well as
for people pitching their own local Summer Solstices and whatever ideas you plan to
try out.

Stories of Summer Solstice
[Epistemic Status: talking in the language of metaphorical soul and mysticism.]
Previously:
Visions of Summer Solstice
Obligatory link to The Value and Danger of Ritual for people just tuning in.
June 23rd, the Bay community journeyed out to the edge of the world to celebrate the
longest day of the year.
Photo Credit to Shaked Koplewitz
This came on the heels of EA Global, which had a strong focus on action, networking,
planning projects and thinking about the future. Much of rationality is about thinking
and doing. But once a year, it's nice to be.
We scoped out several possible locations, and ultimately settled on the Marin
Headlands - a surreal, remote world of hidden beaches, spooky ruins and epic cliﬀs.
Approximately 100 people came, some in 15-seat caravan vans, some individual
carpools.
At solar noon, when the shadows are shortest, we opened with a speech by Malcolm
Ocean. "The biggest thing you'll want to be wary of here is fear of missing out. There's
going to be a lot of stuﬀ going on today. It is not possible to see it all - just like life.

Rather than trying desperately to optimize your time, I recommend just... going with
the ﬂow of the moment."
During the day, we had a few major activities:
Circling
Capture the Flag with water guns, war paint and a literal fort (although we
ended up having to ﬁnd a second fort because the one we meant to use got
sniped by a wedding)
Group singing
Exploration in small groups of the various nooks, crannies and cliﬀscapes of the
Headlands.
We didn't end up building a solar-temple, due to various logistical issues (and I think
largely because there were lots of competing things to do). But a) I'm fairly conﬁdent
about getting that done next year, and b) meanwhile... the drum circle at sunset felt
deeply good.
On the event feedback survey I sent out, the overall ratio of meh/good/great/ecstatic
for was 2/10/13/3, which has me pretty conﬁdent that we got the general shape of the
event right.
This post is a scattershot of takeaways.
Drum Circles and Mary's Room
I've observed drum circles. I've participated in drum circles with strangers who were
not really "my people." I've done circle-singing, which is sort of like a drum circle
except with voices instead of drums. I have some theoretical background in music,
and in ritual. I know what a drum circle is supposed to be like.
Nonetheless, I hadn't really done a drum circle until last weekend.
I was sort of like Mary, the hypothetical neuro/optic-scientist in a black-and-white
room who knew everything there was to know about the color red except having ever
seen it... who then ﬁnally sees a rose.
Rationalists are heavily selected for being very cerebral - and correspondingly,
somewhat selected against being particularly in touch with their bodies and (for lack
of a better word), souls. And drum circles are very much about the intersection of
body and soul. Being present in the moment. Losing yourself in the beat. Feeling the
beat in an important way. Leaning into it, moving, gyrating, maybe getting up and
dancing.
Brent, Malcolm and others arranged for Bay Summer Solstice to end with a drum circle
at sunset. I was worried that we wouldn't be able to pull it oﬀ - that we'd be a bit too
self-conscious to lean into it and really have the magic happen.
But, it worked. Holy hell. Not everyone was able to get into it, but the majority did,
and at least some of them reported it as a peak experience.
I'm not sure if this generalizes, as "the thing rationalists should do at Summer Solstice
Sunset." It does require a critical mass of people who are able to lean enthusiastically

into it and lead others, which not every community has.
But I think the median-quality-rationalist-drumcircle would still be at least as good as
most other ways to end the day. I also think it works best if you invest in some high
quality, resonant drums. Which brings us to....
Material Components
The most important element when creating a ritual or holiday, is to understand what
experience you're actually trying to create. If you're planning a wedding, it's easy to
end up spending thousands of dollars on things that don't actually make the day more
meaningful for anyone.
Before you worry about expensive things, make sure that you understand the basics.
Make sure you know what kind of emotional transformation you're going for. Make
sure you've gotten basic logistic needs met so the event can happen at all. Think
about what all the people involved are going to experience and why.
But.
I gotta say, there is something about High Level Ritual Components that is, like,
actually important.
I think intuitions from fantasy stories / video-game transfer pretty well here. A low
level wizard has simple spellbook and wand. As they level up, they gain skill (more
spells, deeper understanding of magic such that they can devise their own spells).
They also seek out more powerful artifacts - gem-studded golden spellbooks, ornate
staves, The Amulet of the Ancients, whathaveyou, which amplify their power.
They also seek out ancient temples and secret leylines that are latent with energy.
The highest level wizards (i.e. Dumbledore) don't need that all that ﬂash. They can
cast wordless, wandless magic, and travel in simple robes.
But, still, when serious business needs attending to, Dumbledore busts out the Elder
Wand, gathers up artifacts, and positions himself at Hogwarts, a seat of magical
power.
Translating all of that into real-world-speak:
Aesthetic matters.
A good artist can work with crude tools and make something beautiful. But there's still
a beneﬁt to really good ingredients.
I used to buy cheap candles or electric-tea-lights for Winter Solstice. Eventually I
bought these thick candles which look beautiful and have lasted through several
events.
For Summer Solstice, in addition to things like buying a literal conch shell to rally the
people when the people needed rallying... this translated into something which
doesn't (necessarily) cost money, but which does cost time:
Location matters. A lot.

In Visions of Summer Solstice, before I had seen the Marin Headlands, I said:
It's not enough to ﬁnd a small nearby park. Ideally, you want an outdoor space
vast enough to feel in your bones that the sky is the limit. There is no one and
nothing to help you build a tower to the stars, or to cross the ocean, or cartwheel
forever in any direction. But neither is there anyone to stop you. There is only
nature, and you, and your tribe, and whatever you choose to do.
And after having seen the Marin Headlands, I have to say "holy shit guys location
matters more than I thought when I wrote that paragraph."
The natural beauty of the coast is immense. And then there's century-old ruins
layered on top of it - which hint at the power of civilization but still ultimately leave
you on your own.
The location also leant itself well to transitions - walking through tunnels, and around
corners into sweeping vistas. Ritual is about transformation, and an environment that
helps mark this with literal transition adds a lot.
This all made it much easier to tap into a primal sense of "This is the here and now.
This is worth protecting. These are my people."
The Sunset Pilgrimage
After a day of exploration, games, and good conversations with good people in
beautiful places... we gathered at the staging site for dinner, and a ﬁnal speech. As it
ended, Malcolm began a simple drum beat that people joined in on.
We began walking to the coast, drumming as we went. I felt a brief ﬂicker of tribal
power, followed by apprehension - was this going to actually work or would it end up
dragging? Would I feel self-conscious and awkward?
Then we took a turn, and marched through the battery tunnel.

Battery Wallace - photo credit to the Goga Park Archive. Slightly modiﬁed
The drums took on a deepened tone, and we began to sing - wordless chanting,
improvised humming. Some people who didn't have drums banged on the walls. The
sounds echoed through the bunker, powerful.
Meanwhile the sun glinted through the end of the tunnel, silhouetting the people
ahead of me. And... I felt a piece of myself crack open slightly, a particular ﬂavor of
longing that I'd never quite satisﬁed. I've felt that I have a community before. I've felt
the somewhat-deeper version of it that Scott Alexander describes in Concept Shaped
Holes.
But this was deeper still, given material form by the resonance of the hall and our
emergence into the hilltop and the setting sun.

Photo credit Philip Lin
We continued down the hill. The feeling faded in the face of logistical hiccups. We got
a bit spread out. I think most of the people with drums were near the front and the
people near the back had a less good experience.
But despite that, one thing that struck me was the multiple phases of transition. There
were four major arcs to the sunset walk - the tunnel, the hilltop, winding our way
through the woods, and ﬁnally the cliﬀside path.
At each stage, the sun's character shifted. In the tunnel, it glinted around our
silhouettes. At the hilltop it shined over the region that had been our home for the
day. As we emerged from the woods into the ﬁnal stretch, it lay straight ahead.

Photo credit Sarah McManus

Photo credit Anisha Mauze
As we approached the cliﬀ, the sun touched the horizon and began it's ﬁnal descent.

This and next photo credit Sarah McManus
We clustered and regrouped at the cliﬀ, and formed a proper drum circle. It grew in
fervor. People began to dance. Some people played digeridoos. As the last quarter of
the sun dipped below the horizon, people started to sing again, rising in pitch and
intensity.
Eventually all but a single pixel of the sun had vanished.
And I wondered - would a hundred people with no pre-planning all realize in time that
the ideal culmination would be to abruptly stop at the precise moment that last pixel
disappeared?
A few moments later, the pixel was gone. And there was silence at the world's edge.


Funeral Ritual
Followup to: Solstice: What Memes May Come (Part II)
Content note: My own opinionated thoughts on rationalist funeral ritual, which have
evolved a bit since I ﬁrst started thinking about it in 2012. I expect that if you haven't
thought about funeral ritual and ﬁnd that you need to, this will make for a better
starting point than ﬁguring things out from scratch.
But, human mindspace is diverse enough that I wouldn't be surprised if this anti-
resonated with some people. Make of it what you will.
[Edit: In this post, I was speciﬁcally exploring 'funerals where a majority of attendees
are "culturally rationalist"', as opposed to general secular funerals. However, it turns
out much of the advice is still relevant regardless]
Prior: a desire for deep cultural ritual
In October 2012, as I planned the Winter Solstice ceremony, I was thinking a lot about
death. In the space of three weeks, three friends of mine had lost someone closed to
them. And it occurred to me that the rationality community had very little in the way
of funeral ritual.
My friends were all young, but it seemed likely at least someone in the community
wouldn't make it. And we were not ready.
When my Grandmother died, I went to a Catholic funeral. And as much as I don't
believe in any of the doctrine, there was something comforting in having several
hundred people join together to say the Lord's prayer in unison. The literal content of
the words was basically meaningless - what mattered was the knowledge that my
Grandmother was not alone, that hundreds of people were connected to her, and to
each other.
Another friend of mine lost their mother, and had a similar experience. They said
(paraphrased) "when you lose someone, you do not have the energy to try new
things. You are lost. You don't know what to do. The point of funeral ritual is not to be
epistemologically sound, it's to give you something to do, that you know how to do,
that everyone knows you're supposed to do, so that at least you can do something."
A ritual that completely fails will feel hollow. Ritual that almost succeeds but doesn't
match your values or aesthetic feels cringey. I think pushing past that cringe is an
important piece of the modern search for meaning and culture.
But funerals are not the time to experiment.
I looked at this set of facts, and it seemed like the solution (if you wanted an
epistemically sound culture with its own traditions) was to create new ritual in
advance, and somehow make it already a part of your culture by the time someone
died.
For a few years, I approached Solstice with this in mind - using it in part to explore
small fragments of funeral ritual. Hopefully, one day, we'd have some words or deeds

we could share together, that felt right.
Then in 2016, a friend of mine died.
My beliefs about funerals have changed.
It took me awhile to get these thoughts written up. In the past year there have been
at least two more deaths that I know of in the rationalsphere, and I'm ﬁnally getting
around to it.
Cosmopolitan Aesthetic Clash
I still believe in everything above - in principle. In practice...
...there are just too many diﬀerent aesthetics and values at play that are orthogonal
to main criteria of who needs to get value from a funeral.
The point of a solstice-like-event is to bring people together around a shared sense of
values. The point of a funeral is to bring to people together surrounding a shared
connection to a person.
Sometimes, there is enough of an overlap here for you to do something oddly speciﬁc.
If a loved one had a strong aesthetic sense of their own, or spelled out in advance
what kind of funeral they want, that can be a schelling aesthetic that everyone can
agree to honor. There is value in having traditions that feels special, if you can, and
there can be value in respecting the wishes of the deceased, as a way to carry their
agency a little bit further into the future, past their death.
Much of the time you will not have a clear sense of the person's wishes, or aesthetic.
Instead you have a loose collection of people who may or may not know each other,
who may or may not agree about religion or rationality or transhumanism or poetry or
music. This seems to be a brute fact about the modern, atomic, cosmopolitan world.
Tight-knight, culturally homogenous places with longstanding traditions can lean
harder into funeral ritual that is unique, intense and/or deeply signiﬁcant to the people
involved, but I think this just isn't an option if you're the sort of person living in a
major modern city. This makes me sad but I now think it's true.
Funerals are often times when people who don't normally quite mesh with each other
come together again to remember a person they have in common.
And meanwhile...
...the default, minimum-viable funeral or memorial is... just surprisingly potent:
Have a facilitator who welcomes everyone and sets the tone for the event. Have
everyone who wants to take a turn saying what anything they need to say.
Some people will share funny stories.
Some will share times when the person helped them.

Some people might need to be angry, to get some kind of closure on unresolved
conﬂict they had with a friend.
Some people might share a song or poem that is meaningful to them, without any
implicit pressure that the song feel relevant to anyone else.
Some people may just need to silently cry and shake and then be held by someone.
Some people may not have known the deceased well, but have feelings about death
in general that they need to share and process. (Sometimes, most people in the room
may be in this category, and in this case it may perhaps be better for the facilitator to
set a tone, early on, that this is okay.)
When everyone who's had a moment has gone, the facilitator gives a ﬁnal short
speech to wrap things up, and create a space where people who still need to cry or
shake or sit in silence feel a space for that, and people who need catharsis and
release and to laugh and joke with old friends a space for that.
This seems to be the schelling structure of funerals, at least that I've seen.
Small bits of sacred uniqueness
When my friend died, I erred on the side of trying out some oddly speciﬁc things at
the memorial I facilitated. I think this was the correct choice - the longterm value of
rationalist culture required someone to try something at least once that tried to push
through the cringe towards something culturally meaningful.
Having been through the experience once, I think I have a pretty clear sense of what
sorts of things might possibly work, in which contexts. I do recommend most people
err on the side of something simple.
The basic format was similar to the minimum-viable-funeral described above, but with
a few additions. Some thoughts on each:
Passing Forward the Light
I wanted to have at least one ritual frame that was simple and elegant - oddly speciﬁc
enough that I could imagine it becoming a cultural motif, but straightforward enough
to resonate with non-rationalist friends.
We began the ceremony with a single lit candle, placed next to a picture of my friend.
Each person was welcome to stand, to say anything they might want to say, and then
light another candle oﬀ of my friend's ﬂame. If you didn't have anything to say, you
were still welcome to stand silently and pay your respects and light a candle
regardless.
In the end, after the closing of the ceremony, we extinguished the central candle,
while leaving each of our own lights to burn into the night.
It may not be a very satisfying answer to death, to say that we carry a person forward
in our thoughts and memories and in how they shaped us as a person. It's not a good
enough answer. But I think it is a true answer, and in most situations of death,
realistically the best answer we have. A simple ritual that highlighted that while giving
some structure to the event seemed worthwhile.

I think this basically went well, and would recommend it or something in a similar
vein.
Some bits of logistical advice re candles:
I used these small votive candles because they were cheap. But they melted
very quickly in a way that a) made a mess that was awkward to clean up, b) sort
of ruined the moment. I now recommend splurging for more expensive candles
(which last long enough to be re-usable). Longer, tapered candles with a long
melting time are best.
I think the diﬀerence between real and electric candles is enormous.
A mistake I made at the end was snuﬃng out the ﬁrst candle too quickly, in a
way that some people noted felt a bit anticlimactic.
Candles can drip wax - make sure to put them on something easy to clean or
dispose of afterward.
Leaving People Space
The single biggest mistake at the memorial was not giving people multiple spaces for
diﬀerent emotional needs at the end.
Some people were ready to move on, and start talking/eating/joking/connecting.
Some people needed silence, and saw the former people with a kind of horriﬁed
"you're acting like now everything's all right. And it's not."
So I now think it's important to have a transition space - whichever place the
memorial was taking place in should probably remain quiet, or at least keep voices
soft, and let the people who are ready to move on go to another room that's
(hopefully) fairly sound isolated.
Shared Canon
In the opening section, I mostly told a series of stories that highlighted what kind of
person Adam was and what he cared about, but wove in a couple passages from
Beyond the Reach of God. The goal here was to have a moment that included "most of
the people here share some sacred text and beliefs, that gives us a sense of shared
culture." At least some people said afterwards that that was... well, comforting isn't
quite the right word. But, was helpful.
The passages I chose were intended to mostly ﬁt into the broader story without
feeling weird or preachy. (I also framed it a bit as "this is the sort of thing Adam
believed" as opposed to "this is what we all believe.").
I'm not sure how it came across to the people who weren't rationalists and/or didn't
resonate with that aspect of Eliezer's writing. At least one person said that basically
"any time you (Ray) were talking about something other than a story about Adam I
basically tuned out", and I think some other people found it actively oﬀputting, but it
was hard to tell.
The part that I think ended up most cringey was at the end, when I gave the Origin of
Stories speech (from Solstice, although with some parts retailored for the current
context). Some of this probably had to do with the speech being relatively new at the
time, some with the overall quality of the speech, and being the sort of speech that
lent itself to an over-the-top presentation that was wrong for a memorial. (And, some

of the cringe had to do with the fact that I had written the piece, so it felt a bit more
performative that reading someone else's piece might have)
Closure
Despite my leanings toward simplicity and commonality, it still feels important to have
some kind of ﬁnal moment, giving everyone the opportunity for closure. I think the
ideal ending will strike a fairly neutral tone, that can resonate whether you're feeling
angry, grief-stricken, hollow, or bored (and/or perhaps be interpreted through any of
those lenses).
If there is no common cultural beliefs among the participants, I think a fairly safe
ending is taking seven-breaths-worth of quiet reﬂection, or perhaps passing around
the candle representing the deceased giving everyone a ﬁnal opportunity to say
goodbye. Or any kind of ritual action that is mostly free of ideological content.
I think it's good for the closing moment to involve everyone standing - simultaneously
rousing people slightly so they can be more actively involved with the ending, and
leaving them in a stance where they can either sit back down (if they want more quiet
reﬂection or talking), or leave the room for food and drink, and have both options feel
like equally active choices.
If there is enough cultural alignment, my own aesthetic preference is to have some
kind of short poem that most people are familiar with and have some connection to,
that they can either join in reciting, or at least nod along with.
Among "cultural rationalists", I'm not sure how much consensus there is. Some people
identify with the far future. Others do not. Some people see death only to be fought
with grim determination, never acceptance. For some, acceptance is necessary.
I don't know that there's a ﬁnal piece that can work for everyone, but the single best
contender I know of is Eliezer's Song of Dath Ilan:
Even if the stars should die in heaven
Our sins can never be undone
No single death will be forgiven
When fades at last the last lit sun.
Then in the cold and silent black
As light and matter end
We'll have ourselves a last look back
And toast an absent friend.

