
Replacing Guilt
1. Half-assing it with everything you've got
2. Failing with abandon
3. Replacing guilt
4. The Stamp Collector
5. You're allowed to ﬁght for something
6. Caring about something larger than yourself
7. You don't get to know what you're ﬁghting for
8. "Should" considered harmful
9. Not because you "should"
10. Your "shoulds" are not a duty
11. Working yourself ragged is not a virtue
12. Rest in motion
13. Shifting guilt
14. Don't steer with guilt
15. Update from the suckerpunch
16. Be a new homunculus
17. Not yet gods
18. Where coulds go
19. Self compassion
20. There are no "bad people"
21. Residing in the mortal realm
22. Being unable to despair
23. See the dark world
24. Choose without suﬀering
25. Detach the grim-o-meter
26. Simply locate yourself
27. Have no excuses
28. Come to your terms
29. Transmute guilt into resolve
30. The best you can
31. Dark, not colorless
32. Stop trying to try and try
33. There is no try
34. Obvious advice
35. The art of response
36. Conﬁdence all the way up
37. Desperation
38. Recklessness
39. Deﬁance
40. How we will be measured
41. On Caring
42. The Value of a Life
43. Moving towards the goal
44. Self-signaling the ability to do what you want
45. Productivity through self-loyalty
46. Conclusion of the Replacing Guilt series

Half-assing it with everything you've got
This is a linkpost for http://mindingourway.com/half-assing-it-with-everything-youve-got/
I hang out around a lot of eﬀective altruists. Many of them are motivated primarily by
something like guilt (for having great resource and opportunity while others suﬀer) or shame
(for not helping enough). Hell, many of my non-EA friends are primarily motivated by guilt or
shame.
I'm not going to criticize guilt/shame motivation: I have this policy where, when somebody
puts large amounts of eﬀort or money towards making the world a better place, I try really
hard not to condemn their motives. Guilt and shame may be ﬁne tools for jarring people out
of complacence. However, I worry that guilt and shame are unhealthy long-term motivators.
In many of my friends, guilt and shame tend to induce akrasia, reduce productivity, and
drain motivation. So over the next few weeks, I'll be writing a series of posts about removing
guilt/shame motivation and replacing it with something stronger.
1
Say you're a college student, and you have a paper due. The quality of the paper will depend
upon the amount of eﬀort you put in. We'll say that you know the project pretty well: you can
get an A with only moderate eﬀort, and with signiﬁcant eﬀort you could produce something
much better than the usual A-grade paper.
The education environment implicitly attempts to convince students that their preferences
point ever rightward along this line. Parents and teachers say things like "you should put in
your best eﬀort," and they heap shame upon people who don't strive to push ever rightward
along the quality line.
People generally react to this coercion in one of two ways. The ﬁrst group (the "slackers")
rejects the implication that quality=preferences. These are the people who don't care about
the class, who complain constantly about the useless pointless work they have to do, who
half-ass the assignment and turn in something that either barely passes or fails entirely.
Slackers tend to resent the authority forcing them to write the paper.
The second group (the "tryers") are the ones who accept the premise that
quality=preferences, and strive ever rightwards on the quality line. Tryers include people of
all ability levels: some struggle as hard as they can just to get a C, others ﬂaunt their ability
to produce masterpieces. Some try to curry favor with the teacher, others are perfectionists
who simply can't allow themselves to turn in anything less than their best eﬀort. Some of
them are scrupulous people, who feel guilty even after getting an A, because they know they
could have done better, and think they should have. Some are humble, some are show-oﬀs,
but all of them are pushing rightward.
Society has spent a lot of time conditioning us to think of the tryers as better than the
slackers. Being a tryer is a virtue. Slackers are missing the point of education; why are they
even there? The tryers are going to go places, the slackers will never amount to anything.
But in fact, both groups are doing it wrong.

If you want to be highly eﬀective, remember what you're ﬁghting for.
And, spoiler alert, you aren't ﬁghting for "write a high-quality paper." That would be a pretty
silly thing to ﬁght for.
What is your goal in taking this class? Perhaps you're doing it thanks to a combination of
social pressure (your parents said to), social inertia (everybody else goes to college), and a
vague belief that this is the path towards a good job and a comfortable life. Or perhaps
you're there because you want good grades so you can acquire lots of money and power
which you will use to ﬁght dragons. Or perhaps you're there out of a genuine thirst for
knowledge. But no matter why you're there, your reason for being there will pick out a single
target point on the quality line. Your goal, then, is to hit that quality target — no higher, no
lower.
Your preferences are not "move rightward on the quality line." Your preferences are to hit the
quality target with minimum eﬀort.
If you're trying to pass the class, then pass it with minimum eﬀort. Anything else is wasted
motion.
If you're trying to ace the class, then ace it with minimum eﬀort. Anything else is wasted
motion.
If you're trying to learn the material to the fullest, then mine the assignment for all its
knowledge, and don't fret about your grade. Anything else is wasted motion.
If you're trying to do achieve some combination of good grades (for signalling purposes),
respect (for social reasons), and knowledge (for various eﬀects), then pinpoint the minimum
quality target that gets a good grade, impresses the teacher, and allows you to learn the
material, and hit that as eﬃciently as you can. Anything more is wasted motion.
Your quality target may be signiﬁcantly left of F — if, say, you've already passed the class,
and this assignment doesn't matter. Your quality target may be signiﬁcantly to the right of A
— if, say, you're there to learn the material, and grade inﬂation means that it's much easier
to produce an A-grade paper than it is to complete the assignment in the maximally
informative way. But no matter what, your goals will induce a quality target.
Both the slackers and the tryers are pursuing lost purposes. The slackers scoﬀ at the tryers,
who treat an artiﬁcial quality line like it's their actual preferences and waste eﬀort over-
achieving. The tryers scoﬀ at the slackers, who are taking classes but refusing to learn. And
both sides are right! Because both sides are wasting motion.
The slackers fail to deploy their full strength because they realize that the quality line is not
their preference curve. The tryers deploy their full strength at the wrong target, in attempts
to go as far right as possible, wasting energy on a ﬁght that is not theirs. So take the third
path: remember what you're ﬁghting for. Always deploy your full strength, in order to hit
your quality target as fast as possible.

Half-ass everything, with everything you've got.
(My teachers used to say that I could do great things if only I applied myself. I used to tell
them that if they wanted me to apply more eﬀort, they would need to invent higher letter
grades.)
2
A common objection arises here:
Some things are too important to "half-ass." Some things are simply worth ﬁghting for
with your full strength. It's one thing to half-ass a homework assignment, and another
thing entirely to half-ass saving a life. Sometimes you want to push as far right as you
can on the quality curve.
This is both true and false, because it is mixed up. Given any project, always aim no higher
than the quality target, and always strive for minimum expenditure of eﬀort. It doesn't
matter whether you're writing a term paper, pulling a person out of a burning house, or
creating a galaxy-spanning human civilization — the goal is always to achieve some quality
target with minimum eﬀort. Negentropy is scarce.
That said, the quality target can be really really high. In fact, the quality target is sometimes
unatainably high. Often, we simply aren't capable of hitting our quality targets, and in those
cases, we do want to push as far right along the preference curve as we can.
This can occur naturally whenever you work on something diﬃcult relative to your skill level,
or in competitive situations, or if you're signalling your ability to work hard. But don't get
confused. Even if you write for the love of writing, you eventually have to stop editing and
call it ﬁnished. Even if you're getting somebody out of a burning building, you eventually
stop putting eﬀort towards ensuring that they survive in favor of putting that eﬀort towards
saving other dying people instead. Even if you're building an intergalactic civilization, you
need to trade oﬀ energy spent building the civilization against energy spent living in it.
There are goals for which you cannot achieve your quality targets, and in those cases, you
will push ever rightwards. But too many people automatically assume that, when an
authority ﬁgure describes a quality line, they're "supposed to" push as far right as possible.
They think they "should" care about quality. This is silly: real world problems are not about
producing the highest-quality products. In all walks of life, the goal is to hit a quality target
with minimum eﬀort.
This is of course only a fuzzy and inaccurate description of reality. The relative costs of time,
eﬀort, energy, attention, and quality are generally in ﬂux, and change with both information

and circumstance. The essential point is to be able to diﬀerentiate between the implicit
quality line highlighted circumstance, and your actual preference curve.
Let me be clear about what I'm not saying. If you're taking a college course, I'm not telling
you that you should be scraping by by only the barest of margins. If you're saving a life, I'm
not telling you to prefer speed over caution. In general, I'm decidedly not saying that you
must always identify the worst outcome that you'd grudgingly accept as your target.
What I am saying is, don't conﬂate the quality line with the preference curve. Don't get
confused when the teacher labels one quality-point "pass" and another "fail," for these are
just labels, and your deeper goals are likely only tangentially related to those labels.
Remember what you're trying to achieve, identify your quality target, and aim for that: no
higher, no lower.
(Also, remember that the planning fallacy exists! If you shoot for a D, you might get an F.
Humans tend to be overconﬁdent. When you pick your targets, be cautious, and leave
yourself comfortable margins.)
3
The common slacker objection goes:
But what if "get the minimum passing grade as quick as possible" is also boring? What if
this task, too, is meaningless?
Then get out of college!
I personally ﬁnd that shooting for the minimum acceptable quality is usually fun. Doing the
homework assignment is boring, but ﬁnding a way to get the homework assignment up to an
acceptable level with as little total eﬀort as possible is an interesting optimization problem
that actually engages my wits, an optimization problem which both my inner perfectionist
and my inner rebel can get behind.
But sometimes, after remembering what you're ﬁghting for, the whole project will still seem
worthless. Sometimes, the goal of getting the minimum passing grade with minimum eﬀort
will still stink of somebody else trying to pass oﬀ their arbitrary metric as your true
preferences. In that case, consider dropping the class.
More generally, if there's no variation on "achieve such-and-such a goal with minimum
eﬀort" that seems worth doing, then you may need to abandon that goal entirely.
By contrast, the common tryer objection runs as follows:
But I'm a perfectionist! I physically can't stop caring about a low-quality product. I'm
compelled to do my best.
Great! Harness the perfectionist within you, and point it towards the goal of hitting your
target with minimum eﬀort.
Instead of being a perfectionist about the paper, be a perfectionist about writing the paper.
Be a perfectionist about identifying good strategies, about abandoning sunk costs, about
killing your darlings, about noticing when you're done. Be a perfectionist about wasting no
attention. Be a perfectionist about learning from your mistakes. Perfectionism can be a
powerful tool, but there's no need to point it at overachieving on metrics you don't care
about.

4
Attempting to hit a quality target with the least possible eﬀort is, in a sense, a much more
diﬃcult task than pushing as far right on the quality-line as possible. One always could push
further right on the quality line with more time: when one is trying to write a great paper,
they always could correct their ﬂaws with more time and energy. But when one is trying to
produce a paper with minimal wasted motion, mistakes are irrevocable. Time cannot be un-
wasted.
In this sense, switching from being a tryer to a whole-assed-half-asser may lead to more guilt
and shame than usual, if you start feeling guilty about every wasted motion.
However, I see far too many people feeling guilt and shame about not having pushed far
enough along the quality line. They feel guilty about not putting eﬀort towards their job
(which they hate); they feel guilty about not being a good enough friend (when they are
nearly at breakdown themselves); they feel guilty about not fulﬁlling their parent's
expectations (which are ridiculous and uninformed). In order to replace guilt and shame with
intrinsic motivation, it is ﬁrst necessary to break the slacker/tryer dichotomy. If you've got to
feel guilty, please feel guilty about missing your own targets, rather than feeling guilty about
not adopting some arbitrary quality line as your true preferences. The former type of guilt is
the one that I have a shot at addressing.
(Scrupulous people: in the interim, please don't feel guilty about wasting motion! Treat it like
an important part of the human action process rather than something to be ashamed of.
Future posts will expand on this idea.)
5
Most people seem to have two modes of working on problems: the slacker path-of-least-
resistance "coasting" mode, and the tryer make-a-masterpiece "overachiever" mode. When
faced with a problem, most people either put in the minimum eﬀort necessary to scrape by
without pissing oﬀ the relevant authorities, or else they pour their heart and soul into the
task.
Almost everybody spends some time in both modes. Some people overachieve in history
class and coast in grammar class. Some people overachieve at work and coast in their
relationship. In fact, most heartwarming bad-students-can-be-good-people-too stories are
about how students who are slacking in most domains are secretly trying really hard when it
comes to dance/sports/music/number theory.
This, of course, is another piece of tryer propaganda: "Don't worry," the movies say, "these
slackers aren't bad people, because they're secretly tryers in other domains!" As if you're
only a good person if you can adopt some arbitrary quality line as your true preferences.
Most people are trapped in the slacker/tryer dichotomy. They either do as little as they can
get away with or as much as they can manage. They're either aiming for barely acceptable
or they're aiming to be the best. Very few people seem able to pick a target in the middle
and then pursue it with everything they've got. Very few people seem capable of deploying
their full strength to hit "mediocre" as eﬃciently as possible.
Reject the dichotomy. Keep your eye on the preference curve. And remember that the
preference curve says this, and only this:
Succeed, with no wasted motion.

The slacker in you rebels against pointless tasks, and the tryer in you wants perfection. So
satisfy both: aim for the minimum necessary target, and move there as eﬃciently as
possible.
And if ever you forget what it means to "succeed" in one context or another, take a moment
to pause and remember what you're ﬁghting for.

Failing with abandon
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/failing-with-abandon/
This is a short public service announcement: you don't have to fail with abandon.
Say you're playing Civilization, and your target is to get to sleep before midnight, and
you check the clock, and it's already 12:15. If that happens, you don't have to say "too
late now, I already missed my target" and then keep playing until 4 in the morning.
Say you're trying to eat no more than 2000 calories per day, and then you eat 2300
by the end of dinner, you don't have to say "well I already missed my target, so I
might as well indulge."
If your goal was to watch only one episode of that one TV show, and you've already
watched three, you don't have to binge-watch the whole thing.
Over and over, I see people set themselves a target, miss it by a little, and then throw
all restraint to the wind. "Well," they seem to think, "willpower has failed me; I might
as well over-indulge." I call this pattern "failing with abandon."
But you don't have to fail with abandon. When you miss your targets, you're allowed
to say "dang!" and then continue trying to get as close to your target as you can.
You don't have to say dang, either. You're allowed to over-indulge, if that's what you
want to do. But for lots and lots of people, the idea of missing by as little as possible
never seems to cross their mind. They miss their targets, and then suddenly they treat
their targets as if they were external mandates set by some unjust authority; the jump
on the opportunity to defy whatever autarch set an impossible target in the ﬁrst place;
and then (having already missed their target) they reliably fail with abandon.
So this is a public service announcement: you don't have to do that. When you miss
your target, you can take a moment to remember who put the target there, and you
can ask yourself whether you want to get as close to the target as possible. If you
decide you only want to miss your target by a little bit, you still can.
You don't have to fail with abandon.

Replacing guilt
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/replacing-guilt/
In my experience, many people are motivated primarily by either guilt, shame, or
some combination of the two. Some are people who binge-watch television, feel
deeply guilty about it, and convert that guilt into a burning need to Actually Do
Something on the following day. Others are people who feel guilty whenever they stop
working before they literally fall over from exhaustion, and in attempts to avoid that
guilty feeling, they consistently work themselves weary.
I ﬁnd that using guilt as a motivation source is both unhealthy and ineﬃcient, but yet,
I ﬁnd it to be a common practice, especially among eﬀective altruists.
Thus, in the coming series of posts, I'm going to explore a whole slew of tools for
removing guilt-based motivation and replacing it with something that is both healthier
and stronger.
My goal is to help people remove guilt-based motivation entirely, and replace it with
intrinsic motivation. I'm aiming to both reduce the frequency of netﬂix binges and
reduce the bad feelings that follow. I'm aiming to help people feel like they're still
worthwhile human beings if they stop working before they literally drop. I'd like to help
people avoid the failure mode where they feel guilty about something for days (even
after learning their lesson), and I'm also hoping to remove some shame-based
motivation while I'm in the area.
My ﬁrst goal will be to address the guilt that comes from a feeling of listlessness, the
vague feeling of guilt that one might get when they play video games all day, or when
they turn desperately towards drugs or parties, in attempts to silence the part of
themselves that whispers that there must be something else to life.
This sort of guilt cannot be removed by force of will, in most people. The trick to
removing this sort of guilt, I think, is to start exploring that feeling that there must be
something else to life, that there must be something more to do — and either ﬁnd
something worth working towards, or ﬁnd that there really isn't actually anything
missing. This ﬁrst sort of listless guilt, I think, comes from someone who wants to ﬁnd
something else to do, and hasn't yet.
Unfortunately, addressing this sort of guilt isn't as easy as just ﬁnding a hobby. In my
experience, this listless guilt tends to be found in people who have fallen into the
nihilistic trap — people who either believe they can't matter, or who believe that no
one can matter. It tends to be found in people who believe that humans only ever do
what they want, that nothing is truly "better" than anything else, that there is no such
thing as altruism, that "morality" is a pleasant lie — that class of beliefs is the class
that I will address ﬁrst, starting with the Allegory of the Stamp Collector.
I'll post the allegory tomorrow. In the interim, I invite you to devise your own tools for
removing the listless guilt: the tools that people develop themselves are often more
useful to them than the tools they are given.

The Stamp Collector
Once upon a time, a group of naïve philosophers found a robot that collected trinkets.
Well, more speciﬁcally, the robot seemed to collect stamps: if you presented this robot
with a choice between various trinkets, it would always choose the option that led
towards it having as many stamps as possible in its inventory. It ignored dice, bottle
caps, aluminum cans, sticks, twigs, and so on, except insofar as it predicted they
could be traded for stamps in the next turn or two. So, of course, the philosophers
started calling it the "stamp collector."
Then, one day, the philosophers discovered computers, and deduced out that the
robot was merely a software program running on a processor inside the robot's head.
The program was too complicated for them to understand, but they did manage to
deduce that the robot only had a few sensors (on its eyes and inside its inventory)
that it was using to model the world.
One of the philosophers grew confused, and said, "Hey wait a sec, this thing can't be a
stamp collector after all. If the robot is only building a model of the world in its head,
then it can't be optimizing for its real inventory, because it has no access to its real
inventory. It can only ever act according to a model of the world that it reconstructs
inside its head!"
"Ah, yes, I see," another philosopher answered. "We did it a disservice by naming it a
stamp collector. The robot does not have true access to the world, obviously, as it is
only seeing the world through sensors and building a model in its head. Therefore, it
must not actually be maximizing the number of stamps in its inventory. That would be
impossible, because its inventory is outside of its head. Rather, it must be maximizing
its internal stamp counter inside its head."
So the naïve philosophers nodded, pleased with this, and then they stopped
wondering how the stamp collector worked.
There are a number of ﬂaws in this reasoning. First of all, these naïve philosophers
have made the homunculus error. The robot's program may not have "true access" to
how many stamps were in its inventory (whatever that means), but it also didn't have
"true access" to it's internal stamp counter.
The robot is not occupied by some homunculus that has dominion over the innards
but not the outards! The abstract program doesn't have "true" access to the register
holding the stamp counter and "fake" access to the inventory. Steering reality towards
regions where the inventory has lots of stamps in it is the same sort of thing as
steering reality towards regions where the stamp-counter-register has high-number-
patterns in it. There's not a magic circle containing the memory but not the inventory,
I'm writing a series of posts about replacing guilt motivation over on MindingOurWay,
and I plan to post the meatier / more substantive posts in that series to LessWrong.
This one is an allegory designed to remind people that they are allowed to care about
the outer world, that they are not cursed to only ever care about what goes on in their
heads.

within which the robot's homunculus has dominion; the robot program has just as little
access to the "true hardware" as it has to the "true stamps."
This brings us to the second ﬂaw in their reasoning reasoning, that of trying to explain
choice with a choice-thing. You can't explain why a wall is red by saying "because it's
made of tiny red atoms;" this is not an explanation of red-ness. In order to explain red-
ness, you must explain it in terms of non-red things. And yet, humans have a bad
habit of explaining confusing things in terms of themselves. Why does living ﬂesh
respond to mental commands, while dead ﬂesh doesn't? Why, because the living ﬂesh
contains Élan Vital. Our naïve philosophers have made the same mistake: they said,
"How can it possibly choose outcomes in which the inventory has more stamps? Aha!
It must be by choosing outcomes in which the stamp counter is higher!," and in doing
so, they have explained choice in terms of choice, rather than in terms of something
more basic.
It is not an explanation to say "it's trying to get stamps into its inventory because it's
trying to maximize its stamp-counter." An explanation would look more like this: the
robot's computer runs a program which uses sense-data to build a model of the world.
That model of the world contains a representation of how many stapms are in the
inventory. The program then iterates over some set of available actions, predicts how
many stamps would be in the inventory (according to the model) if it took that action,
and outputs the action which leads to the most predicted stamps in its possession.
We could also postulate that the robot contains a program which models the world,
predicts how the world would change for each action, and then predicts how that
outcome would aﬀect some speciﬁc place in internal memory, and then selects the
action which maximizes the internal counter. That's possible! You could build a
machine like that! It's a strictly more complicated hypothesis, and so it gets a
complexity penalty, but at least it's an explanation!
And, fortunately for us, it's a testable explanation: we can check what the robot does,
when faced with the opportunity to directly increase the stamp-counter-register
(without actually increasing how many stamps it has). Let's see how that goes over
among our naïve philosophers...
Hey, check it out: I identiﬁed the stamp counter inside the robot's memory. I can't
read it, but I did ﬁnd a way to increase its value. So I gave the robot the following
options: take one stamp, or take zero stamps and I'll increase the stamp counter
by ten. Guess which one it took?
"Well, of course, it would choose the latter!" one of the naïve philosophers answers
immediately.
Nope! It took the former.
"... Huh! That means that the stampyness of refusing to have the stamp counter
tampered with must worth be more than 10 stamps!"
Huh? What is "stampyness"?
"Why, stampyness is the robot's internal measure of how much taking a certain action
would increase its stamp counter."
What? That's ridiculous. I'm pretty sure it's just collecting stamps.

"Impossible! The program doesn't have access to how many stamps it really has;
that's a property of the outer world. The robot must be optimizing according to values
that are actually in its head."
Here, let's try oﬀering it the following options: either I'll give it one stamp, or I'll
increase its stamp counter by Ackermann(g64, g64) — oh look, it took the stamp."
"Wow! That was a very big number, so that almost surely mean that the stampyness
of refusing is dependent upon how much stampyness it's refusing! It must be very
happy, because you just gave it a lot of stampyness by giving it such a compelling
oﬀer to refuse."
Oh, here, look, I just ﬁgured out a way to set the stamp counter to maximum.
Here, I'll try oﬀering it a choice between either (a) one stamp, or (b) I'll set the
stamp counter to maxi — oh look, it already took the stamp.
"Incredible! That must there must be some other counter measuring micro-
stampyness, the amount of stampiness it gets immediately upon selecting an action,
before you have a chance to modify it! Ah, yes, that's the only possible explanation for
why it would refuse you setting the stamp counter to maximum, it must be choosing
according to the perceived immediate micro-stampyness of each available action!
Nice job doing science, my dear fellow, we have learned a lot today!"
Ahh! No! Let's be very clear about this: the robot is predicting which outcomes would
follow from which actions, and it's ranking them, and it's taking the actions that lead
to the best outcomes. Actions are rated according to what they achieve. Actions do
not themselves have intrinsic worth!
Do you see where these naïve philosophers went confused? They have postulated an
agent which treats actions like ends, and tries to steer towards whatever action it
most prefers — as if actions were ends unto themselves.
You can't explain why the agent takes an action by saying that it ranks actions
according to whether or not taking them is good. That begs the question of which
actions are good!
This agent rates actions as "good" if they lead to outcomes where the agent has lots
of stamps in its inventory. Actions are rated according to what they achieve; they do
not themselves have intrinsic worth.
The robot program doesn't contain reality, but it doesn't need to. It still gets to aﬀect
reality. If its model of the world is correlated with the world, and it takes actions that it
predicts leads to more actual stamps, then it will tend to accumulate stamps.
It's not trying to steer the future towards places where it happens to have selected the
most micro-stampy actions; it's just steering the future towards worlds where it
predicts it will actually have more stamps.
Now, let me tell you my second story:
Once upon a time, a group of naïve philosophers encountered a group of human
beings. The humans seemed to keep selecting the actions that gave them pleasure.
Sometimes they ate good food, sometimes they had sex, sometimes they made

money to spend on pleasurable things later, but always (for the ﬁrst few weeks) they
took actions that led to pleasure.
But then one day, one of the humans gave lots of money to a charity.
"How can this be?" the philosophers asked, "Humans are pleasure-maximizers!" They
thought for a few minutes, and then said, "Ah, it must be that their pleasure from
giving the money to charity outweighed the pleasure they would have gotten from
spending the money."
Then a mother jumped in front of a car to save her child.
The naïve philosophers were stunned, until suddenly one of their number said "I get it!
The immediate micro-pleasure of choosing that action must have outweighed —
People will tell you that humans always and only ever do what brings them pleasure.
People will tell you that there is no such thing as altruism, that people only ever do
what they want to.
People will tell you that, because we're trapped inside our heads, we only ever get to
care about things inside our heads, such as our own wants and desires.
But I have a message for you: You can, in fact, care about the outer world.
And you can steer it, too. If you want to.

You're allowed to ﬁght for something
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/youre-allowed-to-ﬁght-for-something/
The ﬁrst sort of guilt I want to address is the listless guilt, that vague feeling one gets
after playing video games for twelve hours straight, a guilty feeling that you should be
doing something else. Many people in my local friend group don't suﬀer from the
listless guilt, because many people in my sphere are eﬀective altruists who feel a very
acute and speciﬁc sense of guilt when they think they've spent their time poorly.
Speciﬁc guilt tends to be as bad or worse than the listless guilt, but before I address
speciﬁc guilt, I need to confront the listless guilt.
It seems to me that the listless guilt usually stems from not doing anything in
particular. I'm not sure how to remove that feeling of guilt in people who aren't doing
anything in particular. But if they shift the guilt to being guilty about not doing one
thing in particular, then I have some tools that might help.
Warning: in this post, I'm going to encourage people with listless guilt to ﬁnd
something to care about, and to shift their guilt away from a vague sense of not doing
anything towards a speciﬁc sense of not doing one thing in particular. If you already
have strong speciﬁc guilts, consider skipping this post.
The message of the allegory of the stamp collector is this: you can care about things
in the world. There is no diﬀerence in kind between steering reality towards futures
where there are more happy-chemicals in your head, and steering reality towards
futures where there are lots of happy humans outside your head. Your decision
process is implemented by the lump of meat between your ears, but it builds a map of
the entire universe, and you can act (according to the map) towards whatever end
you please.
You only ever see the map, but you walk the territory.
Many people will say that humans only ever do what they want. They wheel out
phrases such as "revealed preference" and say that no matter what people do, they
do it because they wanted to. But here's the thing:
If you use the word "want" to mean "whatever humans actually do," then I need new
words to diﬀerentiate activities-I-do-for-personal-enjoyment (stargazing, studying
physics, tinkering, cavorting) from activities-I-do-for-the-sake-of-others-I-care-about
(attempting to reduce existential risk, donating to charities, community service).
These are very diﬀerent clusters of behavior that feel very diﬀerent, and I need words
to distinguish between them.
If a word describes everything, then it distinguishes nothing, and is useless. If you use
the word "want" to mean "whatever people do," then it can't be used for talking about
actions. In order for "wants" to be about goals humans are trying to achieve for
various purposes, it must apply to some goals and not others.
I'm happy to split the word "want," because it's a pretty loaded word. Sometimes I use
it to distinguish between the stargazing/cavorting cluster and the charity/altruism
cluster, and other times I use it to distinguish between tasks-I-reﬂectively-approve-of-
doing (such as studying an interesting topic) and tasks-I-reﬂectively-disapprove-of-

doing (such as procrastinating by reading boring web pages), which is a diﬀerent way
of cutting up things-I-do that I also ﬁnd useful.
Distinguishing between clusters of things is what words are for. If anything, we need
to make the word "want" more speciﬁc, not less speciﬁc.
Nihilists may tell you that nothing matters, that there is no altruism, that people only
do what they want to, and these are all traps that lead to the listless guilt. They help
people half-convince themselves that nothing matters, and then the other half of
them, which fails to be fooled, goes on yearning for something more.
So if you're experiencing nihilism along with a vague sense of discomfort or guilt,
consider taking a moment to remind yourself that it is possible for you to care about
things beyond yourself, for non-selﬁsh reasons.
I've been surprised, in the past, by how many people vehemently resist the idea that
they might not actually be selﬁsh, deep down. I've seen some people do some
incredible contortions in attempts to convince themselves that their ability to care
about others is actually completely selﬁsh. (Because iterated game theory says that if
you're in a repeated game it pays to be nice, you see!) These people seem to resist
the idea that they could have selﬂess values on general principles, and consistently
struggle to come up with selﬁsh explanations for their altruistic behavior.
Don't get me wrong, selﬁshness is ﬁne. Yet, true selﬁshness doesn't lead to the listless
guilt. If you think you must be selﬁsh, and you also feel vaguely guilty about life, then
perhaps you care about what goes on beyond your head.
In case you're skeptical, here's a little thought experiment:
Imagine you live alone in the woods, having forsaken civilization when the
Unethical Psychologist Authoritarians came to power a few years back.
Your only companion is your dog, twelve years old, who you raised from a puppy.
(If you have a pet or have ever had a pet, use them instead.)
You're aware of the fact that humans have ﬁgured out how to do some pretty
impressive perception modiﬁcation (which is part of what allowed the Unethical
Psychologist Authoritarians to come to power).
One day, a psychologist comes to you and oﬀers you a deal. They'd like to take
your dog out back and shoot it. If you let them do so, they'll clean things up, erase
your the memories of this conversation, and then alter your perceptions such that
you perceive exactly what you would have if they hadn't shot your dog. (Don't
worry, they'll also have people track you and alter the perceptions of anyone else
who would see the dog, so that they also see the dog, so that you won't seem
crazy. And they'll remove that fact from your mind, so you don't worry about
being tracked.)
In return, they'll give you a dollar.
Under the assumption that you will in fact believe and perceive the same things you
would have if they hadn't shot the dog, and have an extra dollar for your trouble,
would you take the oﬀer?

Most people reject it. You're allowed to reject it! You're allowed to reject arbitrarily
good amounts of faked pleasure-experience in order to avoid bad real-world
outcomes. You're allowed to care about whether your beliefs are actually hooked up to
reality. You're allowed to care about things outside of you!
One friend of mine, after probing around in thought experiments such as this one, said
"Huh. Well, so I deﬁnitely care about myself experiencing pleasure, and also I seem to
care about other people actually existing and experiencing pleasure, though I don't
know why."
She seemed surprised and confused to notice that she cared about others, as though
this fact demanded explanation.
You don't need an excuse. You can just care about things outside yourself.
If you have the listless guilt, if something seems like it's missing in life, if it seems like
there's something else you should be doing with your time, then probe the feeling.
Figure out what's missing.
Maybe start by saying, aloud, "I can care about how the world is," and "I want the
world to be diﬀerent than it currently is," if that helps unstick something. And then
listen to that listless feeling saying there must be something more, and look at the
world with fresh eyes, and ask yourself what is wrong. Ask yourself what you would
like to see changed.
Is the world totally perfect? No? What would you change, if granted omnipotence? Do
you want to acquire power, fame, or riches? Do you want to reduce inequality? Do you
want to make it easier for humans to connect? Do you want to reduce loneliness and
despair? Do you want to put an end to disease and suﬀering? Do you want to slay
Moloch, the avatar of a runaway civilization that chews humans to pieces, twisted
them into bitter shells of their former selves by forcing them to take degrading jobs in
order to survive?
Don't just look for ideas that sound nice. Look for changes in the world that compel
you, ideas such that thinking them makes something move in your chest. Look for
places where the world is broken and in need of ﬁxing. Look for things in the world
that are unacceptable. Reject the natural order.
It doesn't have to be a grand and ambitious desire. Maybe you'll just want more
personal gain. Maybe you'll ﬁnd that there's one person in particular who you want to
save, one person trapped in a hellhole that you want to shield them from. Or maybe
you'll decide that you want to save the entire damn world. I don't know. But if you
want to remove the listless guilt, then step one is ﬁnding something to ﬁght for.
Step zero is believing that you can.
Lots of people seem to have these blinders on: the world is big and they are small,
and they're just trying to scrape together a living or get by with skills that don't seem
particularly relevant to their ambitions, and they don't have the time or ability or
energy to make things better. And so they try not to think about it, and then they
forget that they're allowed to have a way they want the future to be, that they're
allowed to have a speciﬁc vision for what they want to achieve.
They forget that they're allowed to desperately want the future to be diﬀerent from
the present.

Finding something to ﬁght for won't eliminate the listless guilt. In fact, it may do the
opposite: it may reﬁne the listless guilt into a more pointed thing, a guilt about not
making the world better right now. It may make you feel guilty about there being so
much wrongness and badness that you're not confronting, that you can't confront.
That's OK: the goal of this exercise is not to eliminate the listless guilt, but to shift it.
The pointed guilt is more painful, but easier to replace with intrinsic motivation.
The listless guilt is a guilt about not doing anything. To remove it, we must ﬁrst turn it
into a guilt about not doing something in particular.
If, instead of feeling vaguely guilty for binging netﬂix due to the feeling that there
must be more to life, you feel speciﬁcally guilty because you could have been
pursuing some concrete end, then we've made progress. The latter guilt, though often
much more painful, is easier to address.

Caring about something larger than
yourself
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/caring-about-some/
In my last post, I said that in order to address the listless guilt, step zero is believing
that you can care about something, and step one is ﬁnding something to care about.
This post is about step one.
There are many diﬀerent ways to care passionately about one thing or another.
Parents in particular are usually good at step one, and often care strongly about the
welfare of their children. Others care strongly about their family, or the environment,
or what-have-you. Many others claim to care about all humanity or about all sentient
life.
On the other hand, some people have signiﬁcantly more trouble caring about big
things. They don't have any children to die for and they don't see the point in caring
about everyone, and yet many of them still possess the listless guilt. When I suggest
to such a person that they address their guilt by searching their motivations and
ﬁnding something to care about, the response, more often than not, is simply "Why?"
This post is for them.
In order to answer, I'm going to talk about my answer to this "why?". Before we
continue, I stress that my answer is not the only one, that my cause is not the only
one, and that I endorse anyone's desires to pursue whatever it is they care deeply
about, regardless of their cause. As with previous posts, don't treat this as a sermon
about why you should care about things that are larger than yourself; treat it as a
reminder that you can, if you want to.
I often encounter people who don't care much about humanity at large (or the future
of sentient life), but seem vaguely curious as to why somebody would. When I suggest
that it is possible for them, too, to care about things greater than themselves, the
most common response by far, is "sure, but why would I want to do that?"
Why ﬁght for humans? Why care about the fate of the Earth, or the fate of people we
will never meet? Why care about the callous species that invented war and torture?
Why care for people at large, when most of them are stupid or annoying or members
of the wrong political party or possessing of incorrect beliefs? Most humans are
annoying, so why would you possibly want to care about them?
I have encountered many people who claim that they only care for their immediate
friend group.
Now, if you actually only care about your immediate friend group, then be it not upon
me to change your preferences. Yet, in my experience, people who think they only
care about their immediate friend group tend to be confused.
One friend of mine insisted that he only cares about the people he's close to, while
simultaneously putting privacy concerns (e.g. privacy of communication over the
internet) very high on his priority list. When I asked why, he claimed (after some

exploring) that it's because he cares about the autonomy and freedom of people in
general. Noticing the inconsistency, he quickly added that he only cares about
autonomy and freedom for the masses because of the pleasurable feeling this creates
within him; it was of course a selﬁsh desire, and he still only cared about the people
close to him. (That was in fact the conversation where I ﬁrst concocted the allegory of
the stamp collector.)
What's going on, here? One thing, I think, is a tendency to confuse feelings with
caring. Most people only have strong feelings of aﬀection for their close friends, and
they don't have feelings that are nearly so strong for nameless strangers, and so they
conclude that they must not care about strangers. They forget that feelings and caring
are separate things! I reassure you that I, too, have deeper feelings for people close to
me than for strangers — but I still care about the strangers anyway. In fact, I suspect
this is true of nearly everybody who claims to care about humanity at large. Courage
isn't about not being afraid, it's about being afraid and doing the right thing anyway;
and similarly, caring isn't about being overwhelmed by emotion, it's about not having
the emotional compulsion and doing the right thing anyway. It's possible to both lack
deep feelings of aﬀection for strangers and still care for them nearly as much as you
care for friends.
This is at least one reason why I think people tend to insist that they don't care about
strangers, but it still doesn't answer the "why." Even once people admit it's possible to
start acting like they care about humanity at large, they still tend to wonder why in
the world they would ever want to do such a thing.
And I can't tell you whether or not you want to do this. But I can tell you why I wanted
to do this, and at least help you understand why someone would.
We humans are reﬂective creatures: we get to examine what we feel and what we
care about, and choose to change ourselves. As it happens, when I reﬂect upon myself
and my desires, I ﬁnd many that I approve of, and some that I don't.
I, like many, spend a large chunk of time frustrated by other human beings (especially
when they fail to read my mind). I have unconscious biases against people who don't
look suﬃciently similar to the people I grew up near. I automatically bristle at
members of my outgroup. I'm uncomfortable around vast segments of the population.
And yet, at the same time, I care about all people, about all of Earth's children, about
all sentient life.
Why? In large part, by choice. My default settings, roughly speaking, make it easy for
me to feel for my friends and hate at my competitors. But my default settings also
come with a sense of aesthetics that prefers fairness, that prefers compassion. My
default feelings are strong for those who are close to me, and my default sensibilities
are annoyed that it's not possible to feel strongly for people who could have been
close to me. My default feelings are negative towards people antagonizing me, and
my default sensibilities are sad that we didn't meet in a diﬀerent context, sad that it's
so hard for humans to communicate their point of view.
My point is, I surely don't lack the capacity to feel frustration with fools, but I also
have a quiet sense of aesthetics and fairness which does not approve of this
frustration. There is a tension there.
I choose to resolve the tension in favor of the people rather than the feelings.

Why? Because when I reﬂect upon the source of the feelings, I ﬁnd arbitrary
evolutionary settings that I don't endorse, but when I reﬂect upon the sense of
aesthetics, I ﬁnd something that goes straight to the core of what I value.
Because when I reﬂect, I see that I am an inconsistent mess of a brain born of a long
and blind evolutionary process, full of desires and feelings and fears that capture
everything I hold dear, and also a bunch of arbitrary junk that was kind of tacked on
there. In making me, Time coughed up a reﬂectively unstable mind: the causal
process of my past constructed me to value everything I value, and some things that I
(upon reﬂection) don't.
So I look upon myself, and I see that I am constructed to both (a) care more about the
people close to me, that I have deeper feelings for, and (b) care about fairness,
impartiality, and aesthetics. I look upon myself and I see that I both care more about
close friends, and disapprove of any state of aﬀairs in which I care more for some
people due to a trivial coincidence of time and space.
And I am constructed such that when I look upon myself and ﬁnd inconsistencies, I
care about resolving them.
So, why do I care about humanity? Because, for me, resolving this inconsistency is
easy. My strong feelings are in conﬂict with my quiet aesthetics, but when push comes
to shove, the quiet aesthetics win hands-down. To me, the feelings look like they are
arbitrary remnants of the tribal days, while the aesthetics look like they are echoes of
my deeper values. I know which one I'm more loyal to.
This is not a knock-down argument, by any means. One person's modus ponens is
another person's modus tollens, and some people, looking upon themselves, would
prefer to forgo a sense of fairness and impartiality instead of choosing to care about
strangers. But I, and many others, don't want to care only about our friends. We feel
more loyalty to our aesthetics than our default feelings — and so the choice is easy.
Caring about others may sound great in theory, but for jaded and cynical people (who
can't stand interacting with idiots), the points above probably aren't enough.
And you know what? It can be really hard to muster any feeling of caring for humans,
even if you've decided that you want to.
It's too easy to look at them and see the tarnished, ugly, greedy, stupid species.
It's too easy to look at individuals and see idiots.
(I have this feeling too, sometimes.)
But here's something strange:
Imagine you've had a pet dog that you've raised from a puppy, and grown close to
over the course of a decade. Imagine somebody napped your dog and started
harming it, for fun.
How would this make you feel? How much would you like to ﬁnd this person, and bring
them to justice?

Most people are able to feel a much larger burst of empathy and caring for suﬀering
animals than for suﬀering humans.
Imagine you're being mugged by a homeless man in an alley. Someone notices,
comes to help, push comes to shove, they scare the man oﬀ, and then ask if you're all
right. Now imagine a stray dog growling at you in an alley. Someone notices, comes to
help, kicks the dog when it won't back down, scares it oﬀ, and asks if you're all right.
Does it feel inconsistent to you, the diﬀerence between the way you feel for
mistreated animals, versus the way you feel towards mistreated humans? Does it
seem strange, how easy it is to like dogs, how diﬃcult it is to like men?
You may, of course, conclude that you actually don't like men. But you don't have to.
You can, as before, listen to the quiet sense of aesthetics that is in conﬂict with your
default feelings. Why are our default feelings hooked up how they are? I can't say for
sure, but here's a theory:
An inﬂuential version of social theory is the 'Machiavellian Intelligence' hypothesis
(Byrne and Whiten 1988; Whiten and Byrne 1997). Social interactions and
relationships are not only complex but also constantly changing and therefore
require fast parallel processing (Barton and Dunbar 1997). The similarity with
Niccolò Machiavelli (1469—1527), the devious adviser of sixteenth-century Italian
princes, is that much of social life is a question of outwitting others, plotting and
scheming, entering into alliances and breaking them again. All this requires a lot
of brain power to remember who is who, and who has done what to whom, as well
as to think up ever more crafty wiles, and to double bluﬀ the crafty wiles of your
rivals — leading to a spiralling arms race. 'Arms races' are common in biology, as
when predators evolve to run ever faster to catch their faster prey, or parasites
evolve to outwit the immune systems of their hosts. The notion that some kind of
spiralling or self-catalytic process is involved certainly suits what Christopher Wills
(1993) calls 'the runaway brain', and this idea is common among theories that
relate language evolution to brain size.
(Sue Blackmore, The Meme Machine)
I mean, look at us. Humans are the sort of creature that sees lightning and postulates
an angry sky-god, because angry sky-gods seem much more plausible to us than
Maxwell's equations — this despite the fact that Maxwell's equations are far simpler to
describe (by a mathematical standard) than a generally intelligent sky-god. Think
about it: we can write down Maxwell's equations in four lines, and we can't yet
describe how a general intelligence works. Thor feels easier for us to understand, but
only because we have so much built-in hardware for psychologically modeling
humans.
Our brains are hard-wired to see human-like agents everywhere. Cartoons work: we
see them as people (and attribute feelings to them) despite their simplicity. We see
intentionality everywhere — religious folks have no trouble ﬁnding apparent
aﬃrmation that their mundane actions are part of some grand plan, superstition runs
rampant, and many diﬀerent types of mental disorders (schizophrenia, mania, etc.)
are characterized by delusions that either everybody is against you or that your entire
life has been carefully engineered — symptoms of a brain over-eager to see things in
terms of human plots and schemes.
When we look at humans, we see them as plotters or schemers or competition. But
when we look at puppies, or kittens, or other animals, none of that social machinery

kicks in. We're able to see them as just creatures, pure and innocent things, exploring
an environment they will never fully understand, just following the ﬂow of their lives.
If you back a puppy into a corner and frighten it, and it snaps at you, it's easy to feel a
wave of compassion rather than hatred.
But when a human snaps at you, the social machinery engages. It's easy to get stuck
inside the interaction. When a human is backed into a corner and lashes out, we tend
to lash back.
Which is why, every so often, I take a mental step back and try to see the other
humans around me, not as humans, but as innocent animals full of wonder, exploring
an environment they can never fully understand, following the ﬂows of their lives.
I try to see people in the same way I would see a puppy, reacting to pains and
pleasures, snapping only when afraid or threatened. I try to see the tragedies in
humans who have been conditioned by time and circumstance to be suspicious and
harmful, and feel the same compassion for them that I would feel for an abused child.
I look at my fellow humans and strive to remember that they, too, are innocent
creatures.
Someone told me once that, in order to feel compassion for others, it's useful to
visualize them as having angel's wings. I think there's something to this. There's
something powerful about looking at people and seeing the angels that never had a
shot at heaven — though I prefer to see not angels, but monkeys who struggle to
convince themselves that they're comfortable in a strange civilization, so diﬀerent
from the ancestral savanna where their minds were forged.
Some use 'animal' as a derogatory, and may think that it's demeaning to try to see
humans as animals instead of people. For me, the opposite is true, for the same
reason that it's easier to feel compassion for a homeless dog than a homeless man —
it helps me, to detach my automatic impulses to see other humans as competitors or
allies or enemies, and just look at them the same way I would look at a kitten, as a
pure creature possessing of the same wonder and innocence.
Why do I care about humans and humanity, about Earth and all its children, about all
sentient life? How can I say I do given that I, too, often feel more strongly for friends
than strangers, and more compassion for dogs than men?
When I look upon myself, I see a tension between what I feel and a sense that my
feelings are ill-calibrated. When I look closer, I ﬁnd that the feelings are calibrated in
ways I don't endorse, in a tribal setting, where it was important to love the ingroup
and hate the outgroup. But when I look at the sense that those feelings are ill-
calibrated, I ﬁnd good reasons, and a sense that this is actually what matters, that it is
not arbitrary but valuable.
And so for me, "why care?" has an easy answer.
Let me stress again that you don't have to resolve your internal tensions in the same
way I do. Your answer to "why care?" might be "I don't." You might side more with your
current feelings over your deeper sense of aesthetics, or you might have very
diﬀerent feelings and aesthetics. Either way, if you listen to that internal sense of
friction, if you use your feelings as a guide rather than an answer, if you ﬁgure out

why you feel and care as you do, and reﬂect upon your reasons, and separate feeling
from caring, and choose to care about what seems right and good to care about —
then you may ﬁnd that "why care?" has an easy answer for you, too.

You don't get to know what you're
ﬁghting for
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/you-dont-get-t/
A number of my recent posts may have given you the impression that I know exactly
what I'm ﬁghting for. If someone were to ask you, "hey, what's that Nate guy trying so
hard to do," you might answer something like "increase the chance of human
survival," or "put an end to unwanted death" or "reduce suﬀering" or something.
This isn't the case. I mean, I am doing those things, but those are all negative
motivations: I am against Alzheimer's, I am against human extinction, but what am I
for?
The truth is, I don't quite know. I'm for something, that's for damn sure, and I have lots
of feelings about the things that I'm ﬁghting for, but I ﬁnd them rather hard to
express.
And in fact, I highly doubt that anyone knows quite what they're ﬁghting towards —
though it seems that many people think they do, and that is in part why I'm writing
this post.
When I wrote on rationality, one commenter replied:
I would just note upfront that
> Reasoning well has little to do with what you're reasoning towards.
and
> Rationality of this kind is not about changing where you're going, it's about
changing how far you can go.
are white lies, as you well know. It's not unusual in the process of reasoning of
how to best achieve your goal to ﬁnd that the goal itself shifts or evaporates.
"How to best serve God" may result in deconversion.
"How to make my relationship with partner a happy one" may result in discovering
that they are a narcissistic little shit I should run away from. Or that both of us
should ﬁnd other partners.
"How to help my neighborhood out of poverty" might become "How to make the
most money" in order to donate as much as possible.
This is a ﬁne point. Humans are well-known for their ability to start out pursuing one
goal, only to ﬁnd that goal shift drastically beneath them as their knowledge of the
world increases. In fact, this is a major plot point in many stories (such as, say, The
Foundation Trilogy, The Dresden Files, and The Neverending Story). The goal you think
you're pursuing may well not survive a close examination.
I claim this is true even if you think your goals are simple, objective, obvious, high-
minded, or sophisticated. Just as the theist setting out to do the most good might

deconvert after deciding that they would still want humanity to ﬂourish even without a
divine mandate, so may the utilitarian setting out to do the most good discover that
their philosophy is incoherent.
In fact, I suspect this is inevitable, at least at humanity's current stage of philosophical
development.
It's nice and clean and easy to say "I'm a total hedonic utilitarian," and feel like you
know exactly what you value. But what does it mean, to be a utilitarian? What counts
as a mind? What counts as a preference? Under whose interpretation, under whose
process, are preferences extracted? Do you feel an obligation to create people who
don't exist? Does a mind matter more if you run two copies of it side by side? I doubt
these questions will have objective answers, but subjective resolutions will be
complex and will depend on what we value, in which case "total hedonic utility" isn't
really an answer. You can say you're ﬁghting for maximum utility, but for now, that's
still a small label on a complex thing that we don't quite know how to express.
And even if we could express it, I doubt that most humans are in fact total hedonic
utilitarians. Imagine that an old friend of yours eats a sandwich which (unexpectedly)
alters their preferences so that all they want to do all day is stare at a white wall and
not be disturbed. Do you feel a moral obligation to help them ﬁnd a white wall and
prevent others from disturbing them? If there was a button that resets them to as they
were just before they ate the sandwich, would you press it? I sure as hell would —
because I feel loyalty not only to the mind in front of me, but to the person, the
history, the friend. But again, we have departed the objective utilitarian framework,
and entered the domain where I don't quite know what I'm ﬁghting for.
If I am loyal to my old friend over the person who sits in front of the white wall, then
am I also obligated to "save" people who naturally want to wirehead? Am I obligated
to the values they had as a teenager? Am I obligated to maximize the utilities of
babies, before they grow up?
I'm not saying you can't answer these questions. I'm sure that many people have. In
fact, I'm sure that some people have picked simple-enough arbitrary deﬁnitions and
then bitten all the associated bullets. ("Yes, I care about the preferences of rocks a
little bit!" "Yes, I maximize the utility of babies!", and so on.) And I'm picking on the
utilitarians here, but the same goes for the deontologists, the theists, and everybody
else who thinks they know what they're ﬁghting for.
What I'm saying is, even if you say you know what you're ﬁghting for, even if you say
you accept the consequences and bite the bullets, it's possible for you to be wrong
about that.
There is no objective morality writ on a tablet between the galaxies. There are no
objective facts about what "actually matters." But that's because "mattering" isn't a
property of the universe. It's a property of a person.
There are facts about what we care about, but they aren't facts about the stars. They
are facts about us.
There is no objective morality, but also your morality is not just whatever you say it is.
It is possible for a person to say they believe it is ﬁne to kill people, and be lying. The
mind is only part of the brain, and it is possible to have both (a) no objective morality,
and (b) people who are wrong about what they care about.

There are facts about what you care about, but you don't get to know them all. Not by
default. Not yet. Humans don't have that sort of introspective capabilities yet. They
don't have that sort of philosophical sophistication yet. But they do have a massive
and well-documented incentive to convince themselves that they care about simple
things — which is why it's a bit suspicious when people go around claiming they know
their true preferences.
From here, it looks very unlikely to me that anyone has the ability to pin down exactly
what they really care about. Why? Because of where human values came from.
Remember that one time that Time tried to build a mind that wanted to eat healthy,
and accidentally built a mind that enjoys salt and fat? I jest, of course, and it's
dangerous to anthropomorphize natural selection, but the point stands: our values
come from a complex and intricate process tied closely to innumerable coincidences
of history.
Now, I'm quite glad that Time failed to build a ﬁtness maximizer. My values were built
by dumb processes smashing time and a savannah into a bunch of monkey
generations, and I don't entirely approve of all of the result, but the result is also
where my approver comes from. My appreciation of beauty, my sense of wonder, and
my capacity to love, all came from this process.
I'm not saying my values are dumb; I'm saying you shouldn't expect them to be
simple.
We're a thousand shards of desire forged of coincidence and circumstance and death
and time. It would be really surprising if there were some short, simple description of
our values. Which is why I'm always a bit suspicious of someone who claims to know
exactly what they're ﬁghting for. They've either convinced themselves of a falsehood,
or they're selling something.
Don't get me wrong, our values are not inscruitable. They are not inherently
unknowable. If we survive long enough, it seems likely that we'll eventually map them
out.
But we don't know them yet.
That doesn't mean we're lost in the dark, either. We have a hell of a lot of evidence
about our values. I tend to prefer pleasure to pain and joy to sadness, most of the
time. I just don't have an exact description of what I'm working towards.
And I don't need one, to ﬁgure out what to do next. Not yet, anyway. I can't tell you
exactly where I'm going, but I can sure see which direction the arrow points.
It's easier, in a way, to talk about the negative motivations — ending disease,
decreasing existential risk, that sort of thing — because those are the things that I'm
pretty sure of, in light of uncertainty about what really matters to me. I don't know
exactly what I want, but I'm pretty sure I want there to be humans (or post-humans)
around to see it.
But don't confuse what I'm doing with what I'm ﬁghting for. The latter is much harder
to describe, and I have no delusions of understanding.
You don't get to know exactly what you're ﬁghting for, but the world's in bad enough
shape that you don't need to.

In order to overcome the listless guilt, I strongly recommend remembering that you
have something to ﬁght for, but I also caution you against believing you know exactly
what that thing is. You probably don't, and as you learn more about the world, I expect
your goals to shift.
I'll conclude with a comic by Matt Rhodes:


"Should" considered harmful
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/should-considered-harmful/
My last few posts have been aimed at addressing what I call the "listless guilt," the
vague sense of guilt that stems from not doing anything in particular. I said:
The listless guilt is a guilt about not doing anything. To remove it, we must ﬁrst
turn it into a guilt about not doing something in particular.
If you didn't have a listless guilt, or if you did and the last few posts worked for you,
then you may now ﬁnd yourself wrestling with a very pointed sort of guilt that stems
from not doing particular things. These next few posts will address the pointed guilts.
One of the most common sources of pointed guilt that I encounter stems from
neglected obligations. Imagine someone who thinks they should stop watching Netﬂix
(because they care about something important, and watching Netﬂix isn't helping),
but who can't seem to stop. Or imagine someone who thinks they should be spending
more time working on their thesis, but can't make themselves do it. Or imagine
someone who thinks they should be smarter, and that their homework shouldn't be
taking them this long, and who feels worse and worse as they work. In each case, the
pattern is the same: the subject thinks there's something they should be doing (or
some way they should be), and they're not doing it (or aren't being it), and so they
feel really guilty.
I claim that the word "should" is causing damage here.
In fact, as far as I can tell, the way that most people use the word "should," most of
the time, is harmful. People seem to use it to put themselves in direct and
unnecessary conﬂict with themselves.
For example, imagine the person who wakes up feeling a bit sick. They may well say
to themselves, "ugh, I should go to the pharmacy and pick up medication before
work." Now picking up meds feels like an obligation: if they don't get meds, then that's
a little bit of evidence that they're incompetent, or akrasiatic, or bad. Now they must
go get meds, if they want to be a competent person. In the lingo of CFAR, this "should"
is the exact opposite of an urge-propagation: it disconnects the reason from the task,
it abolishes the "why". The person feeling sick now feels like they have an obligation
to pick up medication, and so if they do it, they do it grudgingly, resenting the
situation. (And if they don't, then they've failed, and they're at risk of failing with
abandon.)
Now imagine they say this, instead: "ugh, if I went to the pharmacy to pick up
medication, I'd feel better at work today." Notice the diﬀerence? Now the reason
remains attached to the task. Now neither option makes them "bad," and both options
are tradeoﬀs.
I see lots of guilt-motivated people use "shoulds" as ultimatums: "either I get the
meds, or I am a bad person." They leave themselves only two choices: go out of their
way on the way to work and suﬀer through awkward human interaction at the
pharmacy, or be bad. Either way, they lose: the should has set them up for failure.

But the actual options aren't "suﬀer" or "be bad." The actual options are "incur the
social/time costs of buying meds" or "incur the physical/mental costs of feeling ill." It's
just a choice: you weigh the branches, and then you pick. Neither branch makes you
"bad." It's ok to decide that the social/time costs outweigh the physical/mental costs.
It's ok to decide the opposite. Neither side is a "should." Both sides are an option.
Don't say "I really should ﬁnish this paper." Say "if I don't ﬁnish this paper, I'll get a
worse grade than I was planning to, and my teacher will frown at me, and my parents
will frown at me." Then weigh your options. Then choose.
This is not necessarily easy! Breaking a "should" into its component goals, tasks, and
desires may be particularly diﬃcult for people who are still confusing the quality line
with the preference curve and forgetting that it's possible for their preferences to
diverge from the expectations of others. I've often seen people confuse "an authority
ﬁgure expects me to try hard to do X" or "my friends expect me to do X" with "I should
do X," and many people ﬁnd it very hard to tease these apart. (Future posts will touch
on this a little.)
Unpacking a "should" can also be very diﬃcult for a reason that's a little harder to
articulate. Have you ever seen a person who can't even imagine the thought of failure
start to fail? They start to panic, their actions get rushed, their hands start to shake
(which is particularly fatal if their task is one requiring dexterity), they put on blinders
to the fact that they're about to fail as they frantically repeat an action they wish
would succeed over and over.
The ironic thing is, especially in timed, dexterity-based tasks, if the person didn't
panic, they would have a better chance of succeeding. It seems to me that, more
often than not, it's the fact that they can't even consider their failure that is harming
them most. If only they had come to terms with failure beforehand, then they could
keep a level head as failure looms, and this would buy them one or two more shots at
success.
This is related to leaving yourself a line of retreat: If you ﬁnd yourself unable to think
about a certain outcome, it can be very useful to think all the way through the painful
outcome — not to convince yourself that everything would actually be ﬁne, but just so
that you can actually think about it. It's the thoughts you can't think that really screw
you.
Similarly, it's the options you can't weigh that really cost you. People often seem to
use the word "should" to assign a value of "negative inﬁnity" to all alternative actions.
They should do X, so if they don't do X, they're bad, end of story. Some people have
trouble unpacking a should for the same reason they have trouble staring at a failure:
they have a mental geis against seriously considering alternatives, against weighing
them on the scales. One common symptom of this behavior is a tendency to do a fake
unpacking of the should, e.g. by translating "I should ﬁnish this paper" to "I need to
ﬁnish this paper": notice how this trades one negative-inﬁnity analysis for another,
without ever reconnecting the task to the goal or acknowledging the alternatives.
I'm not saying that the alternatives are always good: perhaps the should unpacks into
"I want to ﬁnish this paper, becaues if I don't, then I will very likely fail my course, lose
my scholarship, get kicked out of college, disappoint my parents, and destroy my job
prospects." The alternative options might be really bad. Yet, I claim that there is power
in laying them all out, no matter how bad they are. Make the values ﬁnite, so you can
actually weigh them on your scales. When you should yourself without looking at the

alternatives, you run a high risk of making yourself feel obligated and resentful. When
you lay out all the options you can think of and choose the best, then it's much easier
to work with yourself rather than against yourself — sometimes you have to settle for
the best of a bad lot, but this is much easier once you've actually looked at the whole
lot.
If you often suﬀer from guilt, then I strongly suggest cashing out your shoulds. Get a
tally counter and start training yourself to notice when you say the word "should," and
then once you're noticing it, start training yourself to unpack the sentence. "I should
call my father this week" might cash out to "if I don't call my father this week, he'll
feel disappointed and lonely." "I shouldn't play that video game" might cash out to "if I
play that video game, I'll lose lots of time that I was planning to use for studying." "I
should work on my homework right now" might cash out to "I want to have my paper
ﬁnished by tomorrow, and I also want to go socialize right now, and these goals are
mutually exclusive."
You can almost always re-state a should-sentence without the should. It may seem like
a trivial transformation on sentences, but it might also really help remove the burden
of an obligation.
Of course, cashing out your shoulds isn't all it takes to stop feeling guilty — not by a
long shot. Once you've cashed out a should, you're often left with conﬂicting interests
(remember that it's quite possible to disagree with yourself! I've seen people should
themselves simply because they refuse to acknowledge that they might be under
internal conﬂict). Frequently, after unpacking a should you're still left with a really
hard choice. Furthermore, it's also quite common to cash a should out, weigh both
options, decide that one option is better, and then still ﬁnd yourself doing the worse
thing. (This last problem is a doozy, and I'll discuss it more in future posts.) I'm not
handing you a silver bullet, here.
But it's still a bullet. Don't use shoulds as an ultimatum! Your options are not divided
up into "choices which make you good" and "choices which make you bad": your
options are stratiﬁed by how much they move you towards the goal. So pick your
shoulds apart into their component tasks and desires, and keep the tasks connected
to the goal: don't say "I should get meds," say "I need to get meds if I want to feel
good."
I've found it very helpful to treat almost all shoulds as a toxic attempt to blind me to
the alternatives. Be careful: the thoughts you can't think do you harm, and the options
you can't weigh cost you dearly.
So cash out your shoulds, and weigh all your options on the scales — and then choose
what is best, free of obligation.

Not because you "should"
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/not-because-you-should/
A few months ago, a friend of mine was describing her motivational issues to me. As
an example, she explained she was having trouble making herself clean her room,
despite her dissatisfaction with the constant messiness.
I asked: "Have you considered just not forcing yourself?"
She blinked, and cocked her head at me, and said "but then my room wouldn't get
cleaned."
I called bullshit. Because look: either (a) you stop forcing yourself to clean the room,
and you realize you don't actually care about having a clean room, and then your
room stays messy and that's ﬁne because you don't care; or (b) you stop forcing
yourself to clean the room, and then you get a bit worried, because some part of you
actually wants the room cleaned, so you listen to that part of yourself, and you work
with it, and you ﬁnd a time to clean the room because you want to.
Either way, you win. No need to use internal force.
This is a technique I've recommended before for motivational issues, and I
recommend it again when dealing with shoulds. If you struggle with feelings of guilt,
obligation, or inadequacy, then I strongly suggest the following remedy:
Just stop doing things because you "should".
As in, never let a "should" feel like a reason to do something. Only do things because
they seem like the best thing to do after you've thought about it; never do things just
because you "should."
A commenter to my last post said:
There's some meaning lost when you go from "I should X" to "If I X, I will achieve
Y", which is "And I want to achieve Y enough to X, that's the best of the options."
I think this is mostly correct. Only mostly, because as far as I can tell most people
don't tend to use "I should X" to mean "X is my best option." More frequently, I see
people use it to mean "I would conclude that X is my best option if I knew more facts,"
or "I would conclude that X is my best option if I thought longer", or "I would conclude
that X is my best option if I really cared about what I say I care about."
Regardless, all these various interpretations of "I should X" share one property: It's
extremely diﬃcult to make these claims about X while you're still deliberating.
If you ever happen to ﬁgure out which option is best, then don't slap the label
"should" on it and go back to thinking about your options! If you know what the best
option is, then stop deliberating and do it.
After the fact, looking back, you are welcome to say "ah, knowing what I know now, I
see that pressing the green button would have been better." But in the moment, all

you can do is evaluate all of your actions and see which one looks best given the
information available. Shoulds are for retrospectives, not for deliberation.
What you should do is the option that actually seems best when you're done weighing
your options, regardless of whether or not it has a "should" label attached. You can't
ﬁgure out which action actually seems best by slapping "should" labels on options
willy-nilly and then feeling bad when you ignore them.
Imagine you're trying to solve an algebra problem, with the following method:
1. Say to yourself, "The answer is going to be x=17. I know it."
2. Look at the problem. The problem is "2x = 12; solve for x."
3. Conclude the answer is x=6, and then feel really guilty because x wasn't 17.
This is not the best method ever for solving algebra problems. A better method might
be to look at the problem ﬁrst, without deciding what the answer is in advance or
feeling guilty when it turns out you aren't prescient.
For the same reason, it's a bit silly to slap a "should" label on all your actions before
you actually know which action seems best!
I've seen many people use the word "should" to highlight a conﬂict between what they
perceive as desires and what they perceive as moral obligations. For example, they
might say "well I want to buy this ice cream, but I should donate the money to the
Against Malaria Foundation instead."
I say, this is a false conﬂict. Imagine this person precommiting to never doing
anything just because they "should." How might they feel?
They might feel relieved, because they actually didn't care about helping others, not
even a little bit. So they discharge their guilt, buy their ice cream, and go on their
merry way.
But more likely (in someone who thought they "should" give to AMF), that would feel a
little bad, and a little hollow. This person, when committing to never do things
because they "should," might feel a bit of fear. They might worry that if they didn't
keep themselves in check then they'd never do anything to help those less fortunate
than themselves. That might seem bad, to them.
Which lets them actually see the true problem, for the ﬁrst time: they both want to
buy the ice cream and help those who are worse oﬀ than them. Now they can actually
weigh both desires on the scales, or search for clever third options that fulﬁll both
desires, and so on.
This is a big part of where guilt-free eﬀective altruism comes from, I think: instead of
forcing yourself to give to charities sporadically when the guilt overcomes you,
promise yourself that you won't give sporadically due to guilt, and then listen to the
part of you that says "but then when will I help others!?" Don't force yourself to be an
altruist — instead, commit to never forcing yourself, and then work with the part of
you that protests, and become an altruist if and only if you want to help.
Some people, when they stop forcing themselves to do things because they "should,"
will do a bit less to improve the world. They'll bow a bit less to social pressure, and
insofar as the social pressure was pushing them to do what you think is good, you

might count that as a loss. Some people don't care about things larger than
themselves, and that's perfectly ﬁne, and making them more resilient to social
pressure might lose the world some charity.
But I expect that far more charity is lost from people convincing themselves that their
altruistic desires are external obligations and then resenting them. I expect that most
people who feel obligated to improve the world and only do it because they "should"
will become much more eﬀective if they stop forcing themselves.
It might take them a while. There might be some backlash from years of using internal
violence to fulﬁll a moral obligation that felt more like a bitter duty than a deep desire.
Maybe when they ﬁrst cut themselves free of the "shoulds" they'll go on a self-
indulgent hedonistic spending spree. But most of them, I expect, will make their way
back. Maybe they'll have to struggle through the listless guilt, maybe they'll have to
do a lot of soul searching in order to ﬁgure out what they're really ﬁghting for, but
once they do, they'll be back stronger than ever.
A little while back, I said
And most importantly, guilt doesn't seem like a good long-term motivator: if you
want to join the ranks of people saving the world, I would rather you join them
proudly. There are many trials and tribulations ahead, and we'd do better to face
them with our heads held high.
And this is a big part of it. If you're going to struggle on the side of Earth and all its
children, I expect you can pull harder if you're pulling because you want to, not just
because you should.
Imagine promising yourself that you're never going to do something just because you
"should," ever again. How does that make you feel?
Do you feel relieved? If so, then you were probably putting your "should" labels on the
wrong things and forcing yourself to do things that weren't actually best.
Alternatively, do you feel anxious and worried? Is your mind saying "but wait, if I don't
force myself to do what I should, then I'll never get anything done, and I'll lose my job,
and I'll never help those less fortunate than myself, and that's bad!"? Because in that
case, listen to those concerns when you're making your choices. Engage with that part
of yourself. You may still decide to do a bunch of unpleasant work, but at least now
you'll be doing it because it's better than the alternative, rather than because you're
forcing yourself.
(There's still this one hitch where you decide A is best and ﬁnd yourself doing B
anyway; we'll get to this a few posts down the line.)
When you're making a decision, never let the force of action come from a "should."
The "should" label is what you place on actions after you decide they're best. It's the
label you place retrospectively on the answer, not something that can compel you
towards the answer.
When you're deliberating, your only responsibility is to ﬁgure out which action seems
best given the available time and information. Leave the "shoulds" to the historians.

Your "shoulds" are not a duty
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/shoulds-are-not-a-duty/
I have a friend who, after reading my last two posts, still struggled to give up her
shoulds. She protested that, if she stopped doing things because she should, then she
might do the wrong thing. I see this frequently, even among people who claim to be
moral relativists: they protest that if they weigh their wants and their shoulds on the
same scales, then they might make the wrong choice.
But this notion of "right" vs "wrong" cannot come from outside. There is no stone
tablet among the stars that mandates what is right. Moral relativists usually have no
trouble remembering that their narrow, short-term desires (for comfort, pleasure, etc.)
are internal, but many seem to forget that their wide, long-term desires (ﬂourishing,
less suﬀering, etc.) are also part of them.
Why did my friend worry that, if she stopped forcing herself to follow her shoulds, that
she might do the wrong thing? There are no outside authorities punishing people who
don't follow their best interests. There are no heavenly gatekeepers rewarding you for
doing something other than what's best. The only reason to care about doing what's
right is because you want what's right to be done. Why was she afraid that she would
fail to follow her own interests, if she stopped using internal force? It's you who wants
the right thing done, so if you fear you're not going to do the right things, then
bargain with yourself.
Part of the problem, I think, is that she realized that she wants to both (a) do the right
thing and (b) avoid all the eﬀort that entails, and she feared that without the tool of
internal force, she would be unable to do as much good as she wants to do. This is a
valid concern, and following posts will discuss diﬀerent tools for doing what you want
(without resorting to internal force, which I think is unsustainable — remember,
expending willpower is a stopgap, not a solution).
But another part of the problem, I think, was a lingering sense of resentment towards
the shoulds, for trying to suck fun and enjoyment out of her life.
I see this often. Picture someone who needs to choose between playing video games
all day (and losing their job) or getting abused by customers all day (for not all that
much money). They conclude that they "should" do the job, and they feel compelled
by the should. And then, over and over, I ﬁnd my friends resenting their shoulds, as if
the shoulds came from outside, from Beyond, from the Intergalactic Oughthorities.
They treat their should like shackles that bind them to the "right path", the one where
have to go to work when they could be playing video games.
But the shoulds aren't the shackles. There aren't any oughthorities. You always get to
do as you please, within the bounds allowed by the universe. It's the situation which
forces you to choose between bad and worse. Don't resent the bad option for being
better than the worse option — if you must resent something, resent the situation.
(Or, better yet, turn your resentment into a cold resolve to change the situation.)
If you ever start to feel that your shoulds are obligations, then remember this:

The shoulds were made for us, not us for them.
There are no facts about the stars that say what you ought to do. Your shoulds are not
written in the heavens, nor in the void.
But your shoulds are written in you.
What you "should do" in any given situation is a fact about your brain and the
situation (which takes into account your current state of knowledge, and the amount
of time you have available, and so on).
In other words, someone with a ton of computing power and intimate knowledge of
your brain could tell you what you should do in any given situation.
Imagine being told some of those facts about what you "should do, as computed by
someone with ridiculous amounts of computing power. They print them out on a sheet
of paper, and hand it to you. What would this sheet of paper look like?
I think that most people expect it would look like a long list of obligations, full of
uncomfortable task they're actively trying to not remember. Most people seem to
expect a highly aversive list that reads something like this:
Clean your room.
Send a message to that one friend you fell out of touch with who sent you a
message on your birthday.
Reconcile with your father.
Donate more to charity.
...
This is exactly the notion of "should" that I'm trying to discharge.
Your true shoulds, if I could show them to you, would not look like a list of obligations.
Your true shoulds would look like a recipe for building a utopia.
They would look like a series of steps that make the world the best place you can
make it.
And they wouldn't tell you to do anything psychologically unrealistic, either. Just as the
list wouldn't say "snap your ﬁngers in just such a way that alzheimers is cured," the
list wouldn't say "work yourself to the bone for 16 hours a day while still remaining in
high spirits." No, the true shoulds (as computed by someone with deep knowledge of
your brain and ridiculous amounts of computing power) would appear to you as a
psychologically possible list of things that happened to have surprisingly awesome
impacts on the world.
The things that you feel resentment towards are false shoulds, or at least twisted
shoulds. Encountering one of your actual moral bonds feels very diﬀerent indeed. A
true opportunity to execute a moral commitment feels not like an obligation, but like a
priviledge. It feels like executing a Screw The Rules I'm Doing What's Right trope.
In ﬁction, picture the moment when the villain reveals that doing the Right Thing will
start a war, and the hero sets their jaw, looks them in the eyes, and says "so be it,"
and then does the right thing anyway.

In real life, think of Irena Sendler, who smuggled thousands of Jewish children to
safety during the holocaust, who was captured by the Nazis and tortured and had her
legs broken and was sentenced to death, and who escaped anyway,
and then went back.
Imagine what was going through her mind, when she decided to go back and save
more people. Now, of course, I have no idea what she was actually feeling, but when I
imagine what it would take for me to go back under those circumstances, I imagine
feeling fear, and a hint of despair at ﬁnding myself still capable, but also a burning
resolve to do the right thing anyway.
I imagine her feeling that having the opportunity to go back was a privilege. Not an
external obligation whispered down from the heavens, but an internal ﬁre, a deﬁance
of the natural order, a need to make the world diﬀerent from the way it would be
otherwise.
Irena didn't have an obligation to keep ﬁghting. She had more than discharged her
moral duty. And while I'm willing to bet that at least part of her was scared, and at
least part of her wished she had been crippled and unable to return, there was also a
part of her that didn't look at the opportunity to return to save more children as a
misfortune, but as an honor.
Can you begin to see the diﬀerence between a false should, and a true moral
commitment? Think of a false should, one that gives you a strong sense of obligation
and a hint of resentment (such as "ﬁnish this paper" or "go to work tomorrow"). Now
imagine of Irena Sendler, oﬀered the opportunity to return to Warsaw. Imagine what
went on in her head, in that moment.
I imagine a mind afraid, but uniﬁed, because for her, it wasn't really a choice. Innocent
children were still dying, and there was only one thing to do.
That's what a true moral impulse feels like, when you ﬁnd one. Not like an obligation,
but like a piece of cold iron found deep in your core, the thing that you touch — or
that touches you — in the moment that you really see the best option available to
you, the moment that you realize you already know which way this choice is going to
go.
Your shoulds are not shackles, and I caution you to be wary of anyone who tries to
force a should upon you. For if you are not careful, you may start to feel like your
shoulds are obligations, and you may start to resent them.
Human moral bonds aren't compulsions. They are what let Irena Sendler see the
opportunity to risk life and limb to save just one more child, and treat it not as a duty,
but as an honor. If you told her that she didn't have to go back, that she'd done
enough, that she'd earned the right to turn away, and you asked her why the hell she
was still going back to Warsaw,
then she's allowed to reach inside, touch that something of iron, look you in the eyes,
and say "because I should."
That's how you use a should. Not with obligation and resentment, but with steel in
your heart and no other choice that compares.

I strongly encourage you to unpack your shoulds into their component wants and
desires — I would rather not be responsible for inspiring a bunch of people to run
around shoulding themselves and saying "no, it's OK, these are the true moral bonds."
Rather, the point I'm trying to make is this:
Many treat their moral impulses as a burden. But I say, ﬁnd all the parts that feel like
a burden, and drop them. Keep only the things that ﬁll you with resolve, the things
you would risk life and limb to defend.
Those moral impulses are not a reminder of your grudging duty. They are a reminder
that you value things larger than yourself. They are a description of everything you're
ﬁghting for. They are the birthright of humanity, they are your love for fellow sentient
creatures, they are everything we struggle so hard to send upwards to the stars.
They aren't a duty. They're an honor.

Working yourself ragged is not a
virtue
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/stop-before-you-drop/
Let's get back to the "replacing guilt" series. Here's a quick recap of what we've
covered so far:
Part 1 was about replacing the listless guilt: if someone feels vaguely guilty for not
really doing anything with their life, then the best advice I can give is to start doing
something. Find something to ﬁght for. Find a way that the world is not right, and
decide to change it. Once the guilt is about failing at a speciﬁc task, then we can start
addressing it.
Part 2 was about refusing to treat your moral impulses as obligations. Be wary of the
word should, which tries to force an obligation upon you. I recommend refusing to do
anything just because you "should": Insofar as that sets you free, the obligations were
false ones. Insofar as that sparks fear that something important won't get completed,
seek out the cause of the worry, and complete the task because you want to see it
done, rather than because you "should."
However, having something to change in the world and being free of false obligations
is not anywhere near enough to replace guilt motivation. In fact, I think that most guilt
in most people comes from a diﬀerent source: it comes from people honestly deciding
that X is what they want to do and then ﬁnding themselves not doing X anyway.
Maybe they know that watching another episode of a TV show will cause them to stay
up too late and be tired at class tomorrow, and they know that their classes are very
expensive and that their parents would be very disappointed, and they decide that the
best thing to do would be to stop binge-watching the TV show and get some sleep —
and then they ﬁnd themselves watching the next episode anyway.
This sort of guilt is one of the most demoralizing, and therefore it's perhaps one of the
most damaging types of guilt. Addressing it is going to require quite a few diﬀerent
tools. Today, I'll describe one of them.
(If you haven't read half-assing it with everything you've got, recommend doing so
now: I wrote it as a direct predecessor to this idea, before realizing that I actually
needed the previous seven or so posts ﬁrst.)
Here's a failure mode that I used to see all the time, back when I was a professional
programmer: A co-worker of mine would be working on a project that was almost
under control. It would be a Friday afternoon, with an important deadline coming up in
a few weeks, and everything would be almost passable but slightly behind schedule.
Some dire bugs demanded ﬁxes, some poor decisions required refactoring. Inevitably,
my co-worker would conclude that if they just worked really hard this Friday, then they
could ﬁnish the big refactor, and once that was done, next week they could get all the
bugs under control, and then by the beginning of the week after that, everything
would be back on track again.
(We all know how this story goes.)

Inevitably, co-workers of this type were constantly stressed, and reliably worked late
into the night.
I suspect that most people who act like this are guilt-motivated. They're often the sort
of person who feels guilty if they stop working before they're completely exhausted.
Sometimes, they feel guilty for stopping even when they are exhausted, if there is still
more work to be done. It's as if part of them believes that if they stop before they're
physically forced to drop, and there's still work to be done, then they're being Bad.
This sort of behavior can stem from a number of mistakes. First and foremost, it
seems to me that this sort of programmer is usually pursuing a lost purpose. They
have succumbed to tryer propaganda; they have confused the quality line for the
preference curve. I sometimes want to grab them by the shoulders late on a weekend,
look them in the eyes, and ask them what they're ﬁghting for — surely not this? You're
allowed to ﬁght for something!
But I also see this failure mode in people who love their work, who believe in its
importance. And yet, they still work themselves to exhaustion in a binge/recovery
cycle, as if this were the best way to cause their project to succeed.
These people seem to be following an impulse to work as hard as possible whenever
they can, perhaps due to a belief that it is unvirtuous for one to stop working when
they could continue.
This is an error. The goal is not to maximize how much work you get done
today. The goal is to maximize your productivity over time.
People who feel guilty for stopping work when they could continue seem to be trying
to maximize their local velocity: they feel a need to produce as much as they can,
right now, on pain of guilt if they fail. But the actual goal is to maximize the total
distance traveled, to maximize how much important work you can get done over time.
(When all is said and done, and Nature passes her ﬁnal judgement, you will not be
measured by the number of moments in which you worked as hard as you could. You
will be measured by what actually happened, as will we all.)
People driven by guilt and shame often feel bad for slowing down. This is about as
eﬀective as starting a marathon with a dead sprint, and then feeling bad for slowing
down when you can't sustain it.
Working yourself ragged is not a virtue. You don't get extra points for eﬀort. In fact,
you lose points for eﬀort: eﬀort is costly; spend it only to purchase better outcomes.
The goal is not to appear to be working hard, the goal is to improve the world.
Sometimes you do need to push yourself to the limit, but before you do, acknowledge
the costs and weigh the tradeoﬀs, while keeping your long-term goals in view.
We're not yet gods. We're still apes. Remember to pay attention to the distance you
need to cover, and remember to pay attention to yourself.
Being a human can be frustrating. Human-bodies aren't as productive as we might like
them to be, and running a human-body at maximum capacity for too long causes
stress, chronic exhaustion, burnout, and psychological damage. With this in mind,

doesn't it seem a bit confused for a person to berate themselves for stopping before
they've spent all their available reserves?
Let me be clear: I'm not saying to restrict yourself to only 40 hour per week of work
because it's important to pace yourself. I'm just saying that it's important to pace
yourself. Do as much as you can, but don't be constantly taking damage. We aren't
yet gods. We're still fragile. If you have something urgent to do, then work as hard as
you can — but work as hard as you can over a long period of time, not in the moment.
I'm also not saying "stop as soon as working feels hard." When exercising, it's
important to understand the diﬀerence between soreness and strain, between pushing
yourself and hurting yourself, and the same is true psychologically. Maintaining focus
and productivity for long periods of time is a skill that can be trained, like any other.
(More on that later, but spoiler alert, "feeling really guilty when you didn't work as
hard as you wanted to" is not the best way to train this skill.)
Push your limits! Some things are worth ﬁghting for! But while you're doing that,
recognize that the way to complete a marathon isn't to sprint 42+ kilometers.
There is no shame in doing less than you could do in any given moment. Most guilt-
motivated people I meet would do well to worry less about whether they're going fast
enough now, and worry more about whether the amount of work they're doing day-to-
day is ideal in the long term, taking psychological constraints into account. You don't
get points for pushing your body and mind as hard as you can, you get good
outcomes from using your resources as wisely as you can. That usually entails
stopping well before you drop each day, while steadily improving your capabilities.
Please treat yourself well today; doing so is an important component of long-term
productivity.

Rest in motion
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/rest-in-motion/
Many people seem to think the 'good' state of being, the 'ground' state, is a relaxed
state, a state with lots of rest and very little action. Because they think the ground
state is the relaxed state, they act like maintaining any other state requires eﬀort,
requires suﬀering.
This is a failure mode that I used to fall into pretty regularly. I would model my work as
a ﬁnite stream of tasks that needed doing. I'd think "once I've done the laundry and
bought new shoes and ﬁnished the grocery shopping and ﬁxed the bugs in my code
and ﬁnished the big refactor, everything will be in order, and I'll be able to rest." And
in that state of mind, every new email that hit my inbox, every new bug discovered in
my code, every tool of mine that wore down and needed repair, would deal me
damage.
I was modeling my work as ﬁnite, with the rest state being the state where all tasks
were completed, and so every new task would push me further from that precious rest
state and wear me down.
But the work that needs to be done is not a ﬁnite list of tasks, it is a neverending
stream. Clothes are always getting worn down, food is always getting eaten, code is
always in motion. The goal is not to ﬁnish all the work before you; for that is
impossible. The goal is simply to move through the work. Instead of struggling to
reach the end of the stream, simply focus on moving along it.
Advertisements and media often push the narrative that the purpose of all our toil is
to win a chance at relaxation. We're supposed to work hard at boring jobs in order to
earn our vacations. We're supposed to work hard for decades so that we can retire.
(We're supposed to conceive of heaven as a place where nobody does anything
except lounge on clouds.)
I call bullshit. For almost everybody, inaction is boring. That's why we pick up books,
go exploring, and take up hobbies. The ground state is an active state, not a passive
one.
The actual reward state is not one where you're lazing around doing nothing. It's one
where you're keeping busy, where you're doing things that stimulate you, and where
you're resting only a fraction of the time. The preferred ground state is not one where
you have no activity to partake in, it's one where you're managing the streams of
activity precisely, and moving through them at the right pace: not too fast, but also
not too slow. For that would be boring.
And yet, most people have this model of the world where whenever they're not
resting, they're taking damage. When the homework isn't done, they're taking
damage. When they're reading a textbook, they're taking damage. When they go to
sleep with work unﬁnished, they're taking damage. When they're at a large social
event, they're taking damage. Some part of them yearns to be in the rest state, where
they don't need to do all these things, and insofar as they aren't, they're suﬀering a
little.

This is a grave error, in a world where the work is never ﬁnished, where the tasks are
neverending.
Rest is not a reward for getting through all your obligations. You already dropped your
obligations, remember? Rather, rest (and personal health, and personal time) are part
of the goal. Both because most people care about their personal comfort, and because
taking care of yourself is very important in order to do all the other things you want to
do.
Rest isn't something you do when everything else is ﬁnished. Everything else doesn't
get ﬁnished. Rather, there are lots of activities that you do, some which are more fun
than others, and rest is an important one to do in appropriate proportions. Disconnect
your impulse to rest from whether or not the world is in a stable state, because,
spoiler alert, the world isn't going to be in a stable state for a long time.
Rest isn't a reward for good behavior! It's not something you get to do when all the
work is ﬁnished! That's ﬁnite task thinking. Rather, rest and health are just two of the
unending streams that you move through.
Imagine the person who is tight on money and needs to buy groceries once a month.
Imagine that they agonize over every purchase, even though they know that they're
buying as little as they can in order to secure the health of their family. You might
suggest to them that they stop fretting over individual purchases and come to terms
once and for all with the fact that food is a necessary purchase, and suggest that they
fret over their budget instead. That way, they won't need to suﬀer every time they
enter a grocery store.
The same technique applies to eﬀort. You don't need to suﬀer every time it's time to
do the laundry. Stop looking at the individual tasks, and start looking at the streams of
work, some of which you can widen and some of which you can narrow.
Look at all the streams you want to move through, assess how much bandwidth you
have available, and then simply move through the streams at the appropriate clip.
Some streams will be unpleasant (chores, etc.), some will be basically mandatory
(making money, etc.), some will be quite fun (learning, exploring, relaxing, etc.), and
some of the most important streams are the meta streams (improving your capacity,
ﬁnding better ways to fulﬁll your needs, etc.). But in all cases, simply see the streams
and then move along them.
Many people I meet seem to think that they need to take damage whenever they're
working, and then only heal it when they rest. While they're studying, they're taking
damage. While they're at a large social event, they're taking damage. While they're
doing their job, they're taking damage. They seem to think they "should" be able to be
at home doing nothing, and so when they're not, they're taking damage. They think
that the ground state is a resting state, a state of inaction, and so whenever they're
acting, this is a deviation from the default, and it requires eﬀort to maintain.
I say, the ground state is in motion. The privileged state is not a frozen state. Most of
us wouldn't want to just lie in bed doing nothing forever, anyway. The easiest state to
maintain isn't a motionless state, it's the state where you're out there doing what
needs doing at a sustainable pace. That's the ground state, that's the state that
requires no eﬀort to maintain. Anything less leads to boredom, and it's boredom that's
taxing.

I think one of the reasons people think high productivity is hard is that they think of
lying in bed doing nothing as the default state, and anything else as taking damage.
But it's not. It's really not. We were built to move, and we have things to do.
Make sure you're not taking damage just for moving. If any state of being is going to
wear you down, then I suggest that you feel pressure whenever you start to move too
fast or too slow. Take damage when your life is too boring and nothing's getting done,
and take damage when your life is moving at an unsustainable pace: but don't take
damage when you're moving through the streams at a steady clip.
The default state, the eﬀortless state, is the one where you're moving along many
streams. It is up to you to make sure that you're prioritizing the right streams and that
you're steadily increasing your throughput, but the end goal is not to cease moving.
Total inaction is dreadfully boring.
The ground state, the state to aspire to, the healthy state, the state that occurs
naturally when you aren't forcing yourself to do anything, is the state where you're
getting done what you want done as fast as is sustainable, and no faster.
The ground state is in motion.

Shifting guilt
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/shifting-guilt/
The posts so far have been less about confronting guilt, and more about diﬀerent tools
for shifting it. This is a valuable skill to generalize.
The posts in this series have developed three such tools for shifting guilt. In this post,
I'll recast those three tools as members of the same family, so that you can start to
see the pattern, and develop similar tools from the same family as you need them.
The tools that I have described so far shift guilt to one particular place: guilt about
being unable to act as you desire. This is intentional — that is the one place that I
know how to confront guilt head-on.
The ﬁrst tool for shifting guilt is the tool of reﬁnement. This tool is used on listless
guilts in need of pointing.
Imagine ﬁnding yourself feeling vaguely guilty the morning after a party, having slept
in longer than you intended, your head aching from a slight hangover. Imagine a
vague guilt making your body feel heavier. Perhaps it whispers that the night was
senseless. Perhaps it murmurs that you're wasting your life away. This is the sort of
guilt that's amenable to reﬁnement: ask the guilt what, precisely, it would have had
you do instead of what you did. (It is important, when reﬁning, to also possess the
virtue of concreteness: do not settle for "I should have been studying." Demand a
speciﬁc action: Which book? Which chapter?)
Sometimes, when asking the guilt what you could have done instead, you will
remember that none of the alternatives were compelling. Maybe the party was for an
old friend who you only see once every few years, and fulﬁlling the social obligation
was better than the alternative. Maybe you were exhausted from a day of studying,
low on human contact, and needed the party to reinvigorate you. When using the tool
of reﬁnement, the guilt sometimes simply disappears.
But often, the guilt gets more pointed. Perhaps you conclude you should have been
working overtime so you could donate the money to a worthy cause. Perhaps you
conclude that you had the opportunity and the stamina, but simply not the willpower.
This is good! This is a success! The reﬁnement has succeeded, and the guilt has come
into more focus.
But more often than not, when you succeed at reﬁning guilt, you ﬁnd yourself left with
an obligation ("I should have drank less" or "I should have studied" or "I should have
worked overtime.") This has not yet shifted enough to be confronted. For obligations,
you need the second tool.
The second tool for shifting guilt is the tool of internalization. This tool is used on
guilts that stem from neglected obligations.
I strongly recommend that you staunchly refuse to bow to any guilt forced on you
from the outside. You say you "should have" studied more, instead of going to the
party? Says who? Cash out the should. Again, it is critically important have virtue of
concreteness when cashing out a should: do not say "it would have been better for me
to study more;" for this has not removed the should, it has simply hidden it inside the

word "better." The way to cash out a should (and, thus, the way to use the tool of
internalization) is to ask yourself whether or not it would be OK to drop the obligation
entirely.
What would happen if you decide to never study that textbook again? Is it a relief? If
so, then drop the obligation, and relinquish the guilt. You probably just accidentally
confused someone's quality line with your preference curve. Sometimes, when
attempting internalization, the guilt simply disappears. (Other times, part of the guilt
disappears, and your ﬁnd yourself again facing a vague, unfocused guilt. This is ﬁne,
and indeed quite normal — just apply the tool of reﬁnement again, and repeat.)
But more often than not, when you threaten to drop an obligation entirely, some part
of you protests. Imagine you're feeling terrible for failing to work overtime and donate
money. If you ask yourself "what if I just never donate money to those worse oﬀ ever
again?," then most likely, some part of you will protest "but that would be bad!"
This is good. It means you have your own reasons for wanting to donate, which means
you can drop the external obligation and do it because you want to.
Why would it be bad to stop donating? Don't settle for answers like "because then I
would be a bad person" — that's replacing one obligation with another. If you get an
answer like that, ask yourself, "why would it be bad for me to be a bad person?"
Remember that concreteness is a virtue. Don't settle for an externalized answer (such
as "because then people wouldn't like me"); push on until you get an internalized
answer ("because I prefer worlds where ______").
Keep in mind that there may be many diﬀerent parts to the answer: if you use the tool
of internalization and get an answer that feels uncompelling, such as "because I prefer
worlds where my friends think that I am generous," then ask yourself something like
"OK, let's say that my friends were guaranteed to think that I am generous regardless
of how much I donate to people worse oﬀ than me, then is it OK for me to never
donate to people worse oﬀ than me ever again?" — You can keep doing this until you
uncover all the reasons behind your desires.
This is how the tool of internalization shifts guilt: it forces the guilt to either resolve
itself, or reveal itself to you in terms of your own desires. It shifts the guilt to a place
where the thing the guilt demands are things you want for yourself, rather than things
you want because you think you should.
So perhaps now you feel guilty for not working overtime to earn money to give to
those less well-oﬀ than yourself (which is something you desire due to a deep
dissatisfaction with the unfairnesses of the modern world). This, again, is progress: the
guilt is now focused and internalized. This is exactly the sort of guilt that the third tool
addresses.
The third tool for shifting guilt is the ﬁlter of realism. Look at your guilt, and ask it
whether its demands are realistic.
Ask whether you really could have worked harder and done something else, while
remembering that you are in fact mortal. You are no more able to work 20 hour days
at peak capacity than you are able to cure Alzheimer's disease with a snap of your
ﬁngers. Look not to whether you were moving as fast as you physically could. Instead,
look to the streams you need to move through in order to achieve your goals while
remembering that two of the most important streams are maintaining health and
motivation.

Do not ask, "could I have skipped the party and worked more?" Ask, instead, "am I
traversing the work streams at the fastest sustainable pace?" Check whether the task
the guilt demands is realistic. Remember that working yourself ragged is not a virtue.
When keeping the ﬁlter of realism in mind, many guilt simply fail to materialize in the
ﬁrst place.
But some guilts do pass the ﬁlter of realism, and leave you lamenting a ﬂaw in your
process, an inability to do what you think is best. Perhaps you will notice that you
attend parties far more often than you prefer, due to peer pressure. Perhaps you will
notice that you actually ﬁnd parties draining, and that you were only attending this
one in hopes of ﬁnding a date, which you could have done in a less costly manner if
you were really trying. Perhaps you will realize that you've been adrift, that you've lost
focus, and you'll feel guilty for failing to maintain your drive.
And this is right where we want the guilt. If you must feel guilty, I recommend feeling
guilty not about what you did or didn't do, but about the pattern of behavior that
corresponds to acting against your will. Don't feel guilty for going to this party, feel
guilty for the general pattern of giving into peer pressure, or misjudging how much fun
you'll have, or overindulging. Because this is the sort of guilt that I know how to
address head-on.
The three tools of reﬁnement, internalization, and realism, are, in my case, eﬀectively
universal: I can use them to shift any hint of guilt up to speciﬁc, internalized guilt
about a realistic concern at the process level. I am sure, though, that for many of you,
there will be other forms of guilt that these three tools do not cover.
This is why I make the tools explicit here: so that you can see how they work and see
what they share, and then construct your own variants that work on whatever other
guilts you tend to encounter.
As you hone those tools, I recommend you seek a similar endpoint: shift the guilt
away from the misstep and onto the systemic ﬂaw in your footwork. Shift guilt from
the instance to the pattern. Bring your guilt to this battleground, and I will show you
how to defeat it.

Don't steer with guilt
I've spoken at length about shifting guilt or dispelling guilt. What I haven't talked
about, yet, is guilt itself.
So let's talk about guilt.
Guilt is one of those strange tools that works by not occurring. You place guilt on the
branches of possibility that you don't want to happen, and then, if all goes well, those
futures don't occur. Guilt is supposed to steer the future towards non-guilty futures;
it's never supposed to be instantiated in reality.
Guilt works by the same mechanism as threats: imagine the tribesperson who
precommits to breaking the legs of anyone who steals their food. If this
precommitment works, then it never needs to be carried out: violence is a dangerous
business, and the tribesperson would much rather that they never need to break legs
at all. The threat is something that the tribesperson places on possibilities that they
disprefer, in attempts to ensure that they never come to be.
Imagine, by contrast, the tribesperson who threatens to breaking the legs of anyone
who looks at them funny: they might ﬁnd themselves attempting violence every single
day, and this likely makes their life unpleasant, to say the least. In this case, I would
argue that they're using their threats poorly. I would say that, if you keep ﬁnding
yourself carrying out a threat, then you really need to consider whether or not your
threats are really capable of steering the future in the way you hoped.
Guilt is the same way: if you ﬁnd yourself regularly experiencing guilt, then you're
using guilt incorrectly.
Guilt works only when you wield it in such a way that it doesn't happen.
Guilt is costly when deployed. Once activated, it's usually strongly demotivating, and
can easily lead to failure spirals or vicious cycles of depression.
As far as I can tell, the way that guilt-motivated people tend to operate is by working
fervently in attempts to avoid the scourge of guilt. This may be eﬀective when it
works, but as soon as it starts to fail, the failure often cascades into a full-blown failure
spiral (you're guilty that you're not working, which makes you feel bad, which makes it
hard to work, which makes you guiltier, which you feel worse, which makes it harder
to work, ...). As a result, guilt motivation often results in a boom/bust
productivity/depression cycle that, as far as I can tell, results in people feeling quite
bad about themselves and being much less eﬀective than they would be if they could
maintain a steady pace.
Some might argue that the boom is worth the bust, that the productivity is worth the
depression. This seems straight up false to me (and I have some relevant experience):
the frantic productivity fueled by fear of guilt doesn't seem more eﬀective (and often
seems less eﬀective) than intrinsically motivated productivity, and that's before we
count the losses from periodic failure spirals. As far as I can tell, intrinsic motivation is
just straight up more eﬀective.
(This is something you have to accept before I can help you remove your guilt: it's
much harder to remove guilt if you don't want to.)

Guilt is very costly when activated, so if it's getting activated regularly, then you're
placing it on the wrong branches of possibility.
You might protest, "but then what do I do in the unsatisfying branches of reality? I
need to ﬁnd some way to prevent me from chasing short-term satisfaction at the
expense of long-term beneﬁts." If you regularly ﬁnding yourself binging netﬂix TV
shows, and you would rather not ﬁnd yourself regularly binging netﬂix TV shows, then
shouldn't you feel guilty whenever you do?
No! If the situation occurs regularly, then guilt is not the tool to use! You're welcome
to feel guilty if you ever kidnap a baby or punch a homeless person, and you can tell
that the guilt is working in those cases because you never do those things. But if you
repeatedly ﬁnd yourself in a situation that you disprefer, then guilt is just not the tool
to use. That's not where it's useful.
If you want to ﬁgure out how to avoid a certain recurring situation, then there's a
diﬀerent tool that is appropriate, that's much more eﬀective at ﬁguring out how to
steer the future towards better places: Science!
When you ﬁnd yourself binging netﬂix, don't heap loads of guilt on yourself post-
binge. That sort of thing clearly doesn't prevent the binge. Instead, say to yourself,
"huh, I appear to netﬂix-binge under certain conditions, despite the fact that I'd rather
not. I wonder which conditions, speciﬁcally, led to that binge! What were the triggers?
How could they have been avoided? What methods might help me avoid binging in
the future?"
And then treat it like an experiment! Write up your hypotheses. Experiment with many
diﬀerent ways to ﬁx your glitches. Write postmortems when you fail. If you attempt a
ﬁx and then ﬁnd yourself binging again, then don't heap loads of guilt on yourself!
That still doesn't help. Instead, say "Aha! So that attempted ﬁx didn't work. I wonder if
I can ﬁgure out why?" Cross a hypothesis or two oﬀ your list. Reﬁne your models.
Expand your hypothesis space. Gather more data.
Do science to it.
Don't bemoan individual failures. That's ﬁnite-task thinking. Instead, acknowledge that
there's an unlimited number of changes you'd like to make to your behavior, and that
some of them are more important than others, and that some of them are more costly
than others, and that they all take time to ﬁx. See the inﬁnite stream of self-
improvement that lies before you, add it to all the other streams you're optimizing,
and then simply navigate the streams as quickly as you are able.
Don't feel terrible whenever you do something you wish you hadn't! That is a poor
mechanism by which to steer the future. Instead, when you do something you wish
you hadn't, identify the pattern of behavior that led to this, and add addressing that to
your todo list. Then weigh the time you're losing against the time it would take to
change the pattern, and weigh that against the other priorities that are vying for your
attention, and then do what needs doing.
Sometimes you'll ignore a pattern of failure. Maybe the failures are relatively cheap
and the pattern is hard to change, and ﬁxing the pattern simply isn't worth your
attention. In this case, when the failure occurs, there is no need to feel guilty: the
failures are the price you pay for time spent not ﬁxing them. You can't simply teleport
to a new pattern of behavior, and so if you lack the time to change the pattern, then

the occasional failure is a fair price. Trust yourself to ﬁx the pattern if the costs ever
get too high, trust yourself to understand that investing in yourself is important, and if
ﬁxing the pattern still isn't at the top of your todo list, then don't worry about the
individual failures. You have bigger things on your plate.
Other times, you'll decide that the pattern needs changing. Five minutes per day is
thirty hours per year, and investing in yourself pays dividends. In this case, treat
addressing the pattern of failure like a science project. Every new individual failure is
data point about what doesn't work. Every avoided failure is a data point about what
does. Heaping guilt on yourself whenever you hit a new failure would be nonsense —
ﬁxing the pattern is a science experiment, and individual successes or failures are
your data points.
Most people use their individual failures as a signal to themselves that it's time to feel
terrible. It is much more eﬀective, I think, to use your individual failures as a chance to
update your tactics.
This, in my experience, is the head-on cure for guilt: Don't treat the individual failures
like a burden; treat changing the pattern like a science experiment.

Update from the suckerpunch
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/update-from-the-suckerpunch/
The most common objection I hear when helping people remove their guilt is
something along the lines of "Hey wait! I was using that!"
Believing this (or really any variant of "but guilt is good for me!") makes it fairly hard
to replace guilt with something more productive.
I've met some people who complain that if they didn't have guilt then they'd do
horrible things. I think this is fairly unlikely, and I ﬁle it right next to the arguments
that say that if they didn't believe in God then they'd do horrible things. Even after
dropping your obligations, you will still have something to ﬁght for. Your reasons for
not doing things you'd rather not do will remain even after the guilt is replaced.
Others I have met protest that guilt is useful in order to ensure that they won't repeat
their failures. Without guilt, how would they learn their lesson? To which I generally
say, that's ﬁne, but if it keeps happening then you aren't learning, and it's time to use
a diﬀerent tool instead.
That said, there are lessons that need learning, and there is something sort of like
'guilt' that can help you learn them.
But you can use it even while completely replacing your guilt motivation.
Once upon a time, I had a loose date planned with a girlfriend. She was going to drop
by around 21:00 to hang out. I had something else planned at 19:00 that I didn't
expect to take too long; it ended up taking many hours longer than expected. There
was no particularly convenient point along the way to step out and call my girlfriend
and tell her I'd be late... so I didn't. I simply got home at 23:00 at night, opened the
door, and saw my girlfriend sitting worried on the bed.
There's a very distinct type of feeling that I experienced, there, which you might call
"guilt." Seeing her sitting there on the bed, I suddenly remembered that the anxiety
and dejection that she went through was far worse than the slight awkwardness I
would have incurred to call her. A compartmentalization in my head broke down, and
the part of me that had known she'd been feeling terrible suddenly came into mental
focus. My error became obvious. The feeling was something like being punched in the
gut.
Afterwards, I also had the opportunity to feel a lingering sense of regret for days.
When I suggest removing guilt, I suggest removing the latter — but not the former.
The former is quite useful.
If you worry that, by removing guilt, you will lose your ability to update when you
mess up, then I say: update on the suckerpunch. Trust me, it's strong enough. Update
immediately when you realize where you failed, and use the terrible feeling to make
sure you don't do that again.
Update fully on the suckerpunch, and there will be no need for that lingering regret.
Skip to the end, immediately; update as far as you can, the moment that you realize

your error. Moping for days doesn't make things better. Updating your behavior does.
There are those who still protest that the lingering regret is useful: if you hurt your
friend, you may think that they need to see you spending days ﬁlled with regret, or
otherwise they will think less of you. You may think that others ﬁnd it disconcerting to
see you update immediately and continue without missing a beat. Some people want
to see penance done.
If that is your protest, then I have little to oﬀer you. I can only note that I have seen
many groups of friends form a tacit pact of non-excellence, where each individual in
the group is reluctant to outperform the others, in fear that high performance will be
punished with ostracization. Many have condemned themselves to a life of
dissatisfaction thanks to a non-excellence pact. I say: better to inspire your friends
than validate their mediocrity.
It can give some people whiplash, to see you update quickly, but I much prefer friends
and lovers that encourage skipping to the end rather than those who feel a need to
extract their pound of ﬂesh whenever you err. For me, the social cost of updating
quickly is well worth the ability to move faster. Your experience, of course, may diﬀer.
Just remember that you won't be able to replace guilt-based motivation before giving
yourself permission to do so. For so long as you view your guilt as an aid rather than a
burden, for so long as you view it as right and necessary, I cannot help you remove it.
But I can tell you this:
Almost all emotions, I have found a place for. I have long looked upon Spock and Jedi
with some dissatisfaction: I am not one to advocate suppressing emotion. Anger has
its place and time, as does joy, as does sadness. Awe and fear and cold resolve, I have
found a use for.
I have even found a use for that suckerpunch that occurs when you learn you have
made a mistake, that you might label 'guilt.'
But the lingering, drawn-out guilt, the persistent regret that drives one to work in fear
of it?
I have never once found a use for that.

Be a new homunculus
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/be-a-new-homunculus/
Here's a mental technique that I ﬁnd useful for addressing many dour feelings, guilt
among them:
When you're feeling guilty, it is sometimes helpful to close your eyes for a moment,
re-open them, and pretend that you're a new homunculus.
A "homunculus" is a tiny representation of a human, and one classic fallacy when
reasoning about how brains work is the homunculus fallacy, in which people imagine
that "they" are a little homonculus inside their head looking at an image generated by
their eyes.
It's an easy ﬁction to buy into, that you're a little person in your head that can move
your hands and shape your mouth and that decides where to steer the body and so
on. There is, of course, no homunculus inside your head (for if you are steered by a
homunculus, then how is the homunculus steered?), but it can be quite fun to pretend
that you are a homunculus sometimes, mostly because this allows you to occasionally
pretend you're a new homunculus, fresh oﬀ the factory lines, and newly installed into
this particular person.
Close your eyes, and pretend you're arriving in this body for the very ﬁrst time. Open
them and do some original seeing on this person you now are. Rub your hands
together, look around, and take stock of your surroundings. Do some internal checks
to ﬁgure out what this body values, to ﬁgure out what it is you're ﬁghting for. Check
the catalog of plans and upcoming actions. Check the backlog of memories and
obligations.
There will probably be some housecleaning to do: homunculi are known to get a little
careless as they age, and the old homunculus that you replaced probably let a bunch
of useless tasks accumulate without realizing it. As a new homunculus you have the
privilege of pruning the things that obviously need pruning. Maybe you'll look and say
"Ah, yes, we're going to cancel lunch with that person; this body was secretly dreading
it. I also see that this body is currently spending a lot of cycles feeling guilty about a
date that went poorly last week; we can dismiss that, it's no longer useful for this
homunculus. And also, "exercise" doesn't seem to be on today's schedule at all! How
strange. This body deﬁnitely intended to exercise today; somehow it fell oﬀ the list. I'll
put it back on."
It can be quite liberating to be a new homunculus, without any obligation to propagate
the errors of the old one.
This is, in fact, a common technique for dealing with the sunk cost fallacy (also known
as the "pretend you're a teleporting alien that just teleported into your body"
technique). This is useful for avoiding sunk costs because the new homunculus has no
reason to honor the old homunculus' sunk costs.
Say the old homunculus bought plane tickets which would let you travel to Texas
tomorrow (and return in a week), and that the ticket is non-refundable. The old
homunculus may well have an attachment to the "go to Texas" plan, and may try to

convince themselves to go even when it becomes clear that the trip won't be worth
the time. The new homunculus, however, has no such loyalty to the sunk costs: it can
just evaluate whether or not to go on the trip regardless of how much the tickets
costed.
This is also a technique that works quite well for managing guilt: it's often easy for the
new homunculus to recognize lingering guilt as a bodily response marking malcontent
about something that was done in the past, by the old homunculus. The best action
for the new homunculus to take, usually, is to check what regretted action caused the
guilt, check what pattern of behavior led to the regretted action, mark down a note
about which cognitive pattern needs to be reprogrammed, and then dismiss the guilt
(which has now served its purpose).
As a matter of fact, guilt and sunk cost fallacy are closely related: both are about
suﬀering for costs that were paid in the past. The only diﬀerence is that guilt carries
with it a lesson, an instruction to alter your environment and your mind so that similar
actions don't occur in the future. With practice, it is possible to reﬂexively treat the
initial gut-wrenching guilt as an instruction to update your behavioral patterns, and
then dismiss the lingering guilt immediately. (Cognitive patterns, after all, take some
time to train.)
In the interim I suggest pretending you're a new homunculus. If you start to feel guilt,
then close your eyes and re-open them as a brand new homunculus. Notice the guilt,
listen to the message it bears, and actually write down the behavioral pattern that you
wish to change. Then spend ﬁve minutes (a full ﬁve minutes, by the clock)
brainstorming ways that you might change the pattern and start retraining your mind.
Then thank the guilt for carrying you this message, and dismiss it.
Eventually, this can become reﬂexive. Until then, I suggest occasionally becoming a
new homunculus. In fact, I often use something like this myself, even though I've been
immune to guilt for quite some time: it's a great way to see the world and yourself
with fresh eyes, and that can be invaluable.

Not yet gods
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/not-yet-gods/
You probably don't feel guilty for failing to snap your ﬁngers in just such a way as to
produce a cure for Alzheimer's disease.
Yet, many people do feel guilty for failing to work until they drop every single day
(which is a psychological impossibility). They feel guilty for failing to magically
abandon behavioral patterns they dislike, without practice or retraining (which is a
cognitive impossibility). What gives?
The diﬀerence, I think, is that people think they "couldn't have" snapped their ﬁngers
and cured Alzheimer's, but they think they "could have" used better cognitive
patterns. This is where a lot of the damage lies, I think:
Most people's "coulds" are broken.
People think that they "could have" avoided anxiety at that one party. They think they
"could have" stopped playing Civilization at a reasonable hour and gone to bed. They
think they "could have" stopped watching House of Cards between episodes. I'm not
making a point about the illusion of free will, here — I think there is a sense in which
we "could" do certain things that we do not in fact do. Rather, my point is that most
people have a miscalibrated idea of what they could or couldn't do.
People berate themselves whenever their brain fails to be engraved with the cognitive
patterns that they wish it was engraved with, as if they had complete dominion over
their own thoughts, over the patterns laid down in their heads. As if they weren't a
network of neurons. As if they could choose their preferred choice in spite of their
cognitive patterns, rather than recognizing that choice is a cognitive pattern. As if
they were supposed to choose their mind, rather than being their mind.
As if they were already gods.
We aren't gods.
Not yet.
We're still monkeys.
Almost everybody is a total mess internally, as best as I can tell. Almost everybody
struggles to act as they wish to act. Almost everybody is psychologically fragile, and
can be put into situations where they do things that they regret — overeat,
overspend, get angry, get scared, get anxious. We're monkeys, and we're fairly fragile
monkeys at that.
So you don't need to beat yourself up when you miss your targets. You don't need to
berate yourself when you fail to act exactly as you wish to act. Acting as you wish
doesn't happen for free, it only happens after tweaking the environment and training
your brain. You're still a monkey!

Don't berate the monkey. Help it, whenever you can. It wants the same things you
want — it's you. Assist, don't badger. Figure out how to make it easy to act as you
wish. Retrain the monkey. Experiment. Try things.
And be kind to it. It's trying pretty hard. The monkey doesn't know exactly how to get
what it wants yet, because it's embedded in a really big complicated world and it
doesn't get to see most of it, and because a lot of what it does is due to a dozen
diﬀerent levels of subconscious cause-response patterns that it has very little control
over. It's trying.
Don't berate the monkey just because it stumbles. We didn't exactly pick the easiest
of paths. We didn't exactly set our sights low. The things we're trying to do are hard.
So when the monkey runs into an obstacle and falls, help it to its feet. Help it practice,
or help it train, or help it execute the next clever plan on your list of ways to overcome
the obstacles before you.
One day, we may gain more control over our minds. One day, we may be able to
choose our cognitive patterns at will, and eﬀortlessly act as we wish. One day, we
may become more like the creatures that many wish they were, the imaginary
creatures with complete dominion over their own minds many rate themselves
against.
But we aren't there yet. We're not gods. We're still monkeys.

Where coulds go
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/where-coulds-go/
Most people don't think they "could" cure Alzheimers by snapping their ﬁngers, and so
they don't feel terrible about failing to do this.
By contrast, people who fail to resist overeating, or who fail to stop playing Civilization
at a reasonable hour, feel strongly that they "could have" resisted, and take this as a
license to feel terrible about their decisions.
As I said last week, most people have broken "coulds."
Willpower is scarce in this world. Sometimes, you can will yourself out of a mental rut
you're in, but only rarely; more often, sheer force of will alone is not suﬃcient. If your
plan to stop staying up too late playing Civilization is "well I'll just force myself harder
next time," then this plan is doomed to failure. If it didn't work last time, it likely won't
work next time. Willpower is a stopgap, not a remedy.
I think that most people's "coulds" are broken because they put the action nodes in
the wrong place. They think that the "choice" occurred at turn 347 of Civilization,
when they decided to continue playing one more round (and at each following turn
between midnight and 4:00 in the morning).
But that's not where the choice occurred. If you have to force yourself to change your
behavior, then you've already missed the real choice node.
The actual choice occurs when you decide whether to play Civilization or not, at the
very beginning.
Say you have one acquaintance in your social circles who regularly frustrates you, and
every so often, you explode at them and get into a big shouting match. You know you
shouldn't start yelling at them, you try to not be frustrated. Whenever they start
annoying you, you will yourself to cool down, but it never quite works (no matter how
strongly you resolve to force yourself harder next time). In this case, I suggest that
you stop trying to force yourself to hold back as your frustration peaks, and instead
start noticing what happens ﬁve minutes before you explode. That's where the real
choice is. The real choice isn't in whether or not you explode in the moment, it's in
whether you exit the situation ﬁve minutes earlier.
The real choices tend to happen a few minutes before the choices that people beat
themselves up about. If you have to apply willpower, you've already missed the choice
node. (In fact, I've previously suggested promising yourself that you'll never pull
yourself out of a situation using willpower — knowing that you won't save your own
ass if you get into a situation where you need willpower to extract yourself really
makes you notice the true point of no return when it comes along.)
If you ﬁnd yourself in a pattern of behavior you don't like, then I recommend
pretending you don't have any willpower. Imagine you lived in the world where you
couldn't force yourself to stop doing something addicting after starting. In that world,
how would you act?

Look for the triggers that precede the action you wish you could make diﬀerently.
What happens an hour beforehand? What happens ﬁve minutes beforehand? What
happens sixty seconds before you fail to act as you wish?
That's where the real choice lies.
Most people's coulds are broken. They treat themselves like they "could" start
bingeing a TV show and then stop at a reasonable hour. They put themselves in a
situation that tempts them against their better judgement, and then berate
themselves when they succumb.
By contrast, I don't treat myself as if I "could" stop binge-reading a good book, and
therefore I don't feel terrible if I binge. Instead, I say, "ah, I see, I binge-read engaging
books; I will treat 'read an engaging book' as a single atomic action that takes ﬁve to
twenty hours, with no choice nodes in between." Where others are berating
themselves for failing to complete an impossible task ("stop binge-reading halfway
through and get back to real work"), I am learning what I am and am not capable of,
and learning where my real action nodes are.
We humans don't have all the choice nodes. Sometimes, we can't stop binge-reading
a good book anymore than we could snap our ﬁngers to cure Alzheimer's disease.
Sometimes, addiction takes over; other times, the lizard brain takes over; other times,
primal rage takes over. In those moments, we don't get to call the shots. We aren't the
choice-makers at every point in our lives. We often lack the willpower to override our
impulses, instincts, and habits.
The goal is to win anyway.
Our better judgement is not the absolute arbiter of our actions, and there are often
times when the voice of judgement is nearly powerless to aﬀect our behavior. We
aren't yet gods. We're still monkeys. Still neural nets.
I suggest you stop berating yourself for failing to complete impossible tasks, and start
experimenting and identifying which action nodes work.
Search for the choices that let you act as you wish before the decision gets diﬃcult to
execute. Learn how to identify the moments when your mind is readily responding to
your will. Those are the real choice-points, and it is from there that you may optimize.

Self compassion
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/self-compassion/
Imagine a time when you were feeling guilt-wracked. Maybe a time you hurt a friend
badly. Maybe a time you tried to do get some important work done, and found you
couldn't, and this kicked oﬀ a failure spiral leading to a deep depression. Maybe some
other time: the important thing is to load into memory a time you felt guilt-wracked,
and recall how you felt towards yourself in that case.
(When I do this, I get an internal sense of resistance, of not-wanting-to-look, of willing-
the-past-to-be-diﬀerent.)
Now imagine you have a child, who grows to the same age that you were then, who
ﬁnds themselves in exactly the same situation. Maybe they, too, hurt somebody badly
-- they didn't consciously realize how badly they were about to hurt a friend until one
moment too late, and now they feel terrible. Or maybe they, too, tried to do
something important, and found it hard, and started doubting themselves, and
spiraled downwards into a depression that they now have trouble climbing out of.
Imagine what you might feel towards your child, in this scenario.
(When I do this, I get a sense of compassion, of protectiveness, and a desire to
reassure them that this is what it looks like to learn hard lessons, for us monkeys.)
I encourage you to simulate the feelings you would feel towards your child in this
situation —
— and then check whether you can also feel that way towards yourself.
When you think of your own failings, can you feel that compassion and protectiveness
and impulse to reassure towards you?
Many can't. Some don't feel compassion towards others in the ﬁrst place (this post is
not for them — if you want help feeling compassion towards your fellow humans, then
maybe try this post and see if it works for you.) Others can as easily feel compassion
for themselves as others. But many people I've spoken to experience a wide gulf
between compassion for others and self-compassion — which is a shame, because
self-compassion is an important part of self-loyalty and the mental toolset I'm trying to
convey with these posts.
To close the gap between compassion and self-compassion, I oﬀer two tools. The ﬁrst
is a reminder that self-compassion is not the same thing as self-pity, and nor is it the
same thing as making excuses for yourself. It is well possible to feel self-compassion
even while thinking that you are not moving fast enough. It is perfectly possible to feel
self-compassion even as you notice that you're completely failing to act as you wish
to.
For example, imagine someone going through boot camp in World War II, ﬁlled with
resolve and determination to become a soldier and defend the free world — except
they are a small person, and a weak one. Imagine them working their heart out, trying
as hard as they can, and failing anyway. Imagine them failing to make the cut. Now,

can you imagine feeling compassion for them, feeling warmth towards them, and
maybe feeling a hint of sadness for their loss, without feeling any sense of pity?
Compassion for yourself can be similar, without any hint of pity.
Or imagine another person going through the same boot camp, who really wants to go
defend the free world with all their peers (on some level), but who lacks the deep
drive. They want to feel the same passion and ﬁre as their diminutive counterpart, but
instead they feel resistance and suﬀer from depression — and every day they drag
themselves out of bed (slightly too late), and every day they force themselves through
the obstacle courses (but not quickly enough), and they aren't going to make the cut,
and they're sick with guilt about it. Can you imagine feeling compassion for them in
their plight, while making absolutely no excuses for their performance? Again, self-
compassion can be the same way. You don't need to make excuses for yourself, to
take the outside view and feel the same warmth for a monkey that's trying to try,
against the gradient of depression and doubt.
Now imagine someone else doing what you're trying to do. Imagine them working on
hard problems, and putting in what eﬀort they can muster — sometimes it is enough,
sometimes it isn't; sometimes they are highly motivated, other times they are blocked
by their own mind and unable to act as they wish. Look at them and see the fragile
monkey trying to build a satisfactory life, trying to improve their world. See if you can
feel compassion for them. You don't need to pity them, you don't need to make
excuses for their failures, you don't need to ﬁnd ways they could improve: simply see
if you can feel some warmth, for a fellow lost monkey — and then shift your gaze to
yourself, and see if you can feel a similar sort of warmth.
The second tool I oﬀer, to close the gap between compassion for others and
compassion for yourself, is this: I recommend that you pinch yourself, and remember
what you are. Practice original seeing while looking upon yourself and your situation.
What do you see?
I see bundles of proteins and lipids arranged in a giant colony of cells, their lives given
over to the implementation of a wet protein computer that thinks it's a person.
I see fractal patterns that arise on precisely the right sort of planet when you pour
sunlight into it for a billion years.
I see wiggles in the Sun's wake that struggle to understand the universe.
Incomprehensibly large constructs made of atoms, which are unnoticeably small on
the scale of galaxies.
Look at us, the ﬁrst species among the animals that can ﬁgure out what the stars are,
yet still tightly bound to impulse and social pressure. (Notice how silly it is, monkeys
acting all serious and wise as they try to aﬀect the course of history.)
Look at us: half monkey, half god; towering below the stars.
Look at whatever quest you've taken on, you who was forged by the death of your
father's brothers and now claims dominion over the future. Acknowledge that what
you're trying to do is diﬃcult. Turn the monkey sight on yourself, and see the lost
monkey who's trying to steer an entire universe...
and say hello. Check in with the monkey. See how it's doing.

Steering the future is a diﬃcult thing. The world is large beyond comprehension, and
the monkey wasn't really built for this. The monkey isn't really used to this sort of
thing, and it can be pretty hard to work with sometimes.
Let the monkey know that you have its back. Let it know that you'll still have its back,
even if it gets ornery or diﬃcult or depressed. Through thick and thin, let you know
that you have your support; that even when you screw everything, you'll stand by
yourself, and help you through the mess, and help you ﬁgure out how to do better in
the future.
See if you can resolve to work with yourself. You can do powerful things, if you work
together.

There are no "bad people"
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/there-are-no/
When I help friends debug their intrinsic motivation, here's a pattern I often bump
into:
Well, if I don't actually start working soon, then I'll be a bad person.
Or, even more worrying:
Well they wanted me to just buckle down and do the work, and I really didn't want
to do it then, which means that either they were bad, or I was bad. And I didn't
want to be the bad one bad, so I got angry at them, and...
I confess, I do not know what it would mean for somebody to be a "bad person." I do
know what it means for somebody to be bad at achieving the goals they set for
themselves. I do know what it means for someone to be good at pursuing goals that I
dislike. I have no idea what it would mean for a person to "be bad."
I know what it means for a person to lack skill in a speciﬁc area. I know what it means
for a person to be procrastinating. I know what it means for a person to be acting
under impulses that they don't endorse, such as spite or disgust. I know what it means
for someone to fail to act as they wish to act. I know what it means for someone to
hurt other people, either on purpose or with a feeling of helpless resignation.
But I don't know what it would mean for a person to "be bad." That fails to parse.
People don't have a hidden stone deep inside their brain that is either green or red
depending on whether they are good or bad. "Badness" is not a fundamental property
that a person can have. At best, "they're bad" can be shorthand for either "I don't
want their goals achieved" or "they are untrained in a number of skills which would be
relevant to the present situation"; but in all cases, "they are bad" must be either
shorthand or nonsense.
Asking whether a person is "fundamentally good" or "fundamentally bad" is a type
error. Life is not a quest where you struggle to wind up "good." That's not the sort of
reality we ﬁnd ourselves in.
Rather, we ﬁnd ourselves embedded in a vast universe, with control over the future
and a goal of making it wonderful. We ﬁnd ourselves to be part of a grand
deterministic pattern, and we're trying to make that pattern as beautiful as possible.
Step back and imagine history as a ﬁxed path through the great crystal that is our
universe over all time; the time-crystal that describes everything everywhere and
everywhen; the time-crystal where you can look not only forwards and backwards, but
beforewards and afterwards. Imagine the path of history that dances through
conﬁgurations to the tune of physics. That same physics, according to which the line
jigs and jags, is what implements you. In those jigs and jags is the pattern that is your
mind. Some of the jigs compute your thoughts, some of the jags compute your
choices, and your choices determine how the line dances in the afterwards direction
past the event of your choice.

We aren't here to alter the color of the fundamental "goodness" stone buried within
us; we're here to make the path through time be a good one.
Life is not a game of "wind up good at the end"; life is about steering the future.
Look not to whether you are good or bad. Look to where you are, and what you can do
from there.
Living this mindset does not mean that you lack regrets. It does not free you from the
burdens of your wrongdoings. I, like anyone, suﬀer from recalling harms that I have
done to others. But instead of treating those recollections as dark judgements on my
soul, I treat them as messages from my past, information about what sorts of
undesirable behavior the Nate-monkey is liable to execute if I am not careful.
I sometimes ﬁnd myself unable to act as I wish; unresponsive to my own cajoling. I
treat these not as evidence of my fundamental brokenness, but as evidence about
how and when I can intervene on the world.
While I often fail, I do not act under fear of being judged inadequate by the universe. I
may be inadequate to the tasks I undertake, I may fail to steer the future as I wish to,
but I cannot be "fundamentally bad." That sentence does not parse.
There is something freeing about this: I may succeed; I may fail; but I will not be
judged by someone who roots through my mind to see whether the stone is green or
red.
I will be judged only by the path that the future takes; as will we all.
By contrast, when I help friends debug their motivation, I often ﬁnd them motivated
by a desperate attempt to avoid "being bad."
Where I can, I encourage them not to let that be at the core of what motivates them.
It's well and good, when introspecting about why what you're doing is important, to
get an answer from yourself that is of the form "otherwise I'll be bad." That's a ﬁne
answer to get. But don't let that be the end of things. Don't pretend that that's the
ﬁnal answer. Investigate.
Ask yourself, "what do I mean by that?" Say to yourself, "I bet that's shorthand for
something." Unpack the feeling of would-be-bad.
If someone wants you to do the laundry, and you don't want to do the laundry, and
you get angry at them because you have a sense that if there is conﬂict then one of
you must be bad and you don't want to be bad—
—then pause, and investigate further.
Focus, and ask yourself what bad thing would happen if you did do the laundry, and
what bad thing would happen if you didn't.
Maybe you get an answer like "if I don't do the laundry then it will strain my
relationship with my friend, but if I do do the laundry then it will spend scarce energy
and attention and I'm feeling really exhausted and don't want to force myself to do it."

That's great! (The answer doesn't need to be comfortable, it just needs to be
unpacked. You may well reveal conﬂicting desires. You may well ﬁnd that you were
ignoring goals that you had but didn't endorse, such as preserving your own attention
or energy.) This is a similar mental action to unpacking a should: if you ﬁnd yourself
compelled to do something because otherwise you'd "be bad," then become curious,
investigate, and unpack the feeling into it's component parts.
Ask yourself, "I don't know what it would mean to be bad; can you elaborate?"
Then, listen to yourself. Don't worry if your answers seem senseless! Often, I have
watched people completely fail to ﬁgure out what is blocking them, because as soon
as they get an answer from deep inside their mind, they declare that it's ridiculous,
and then they struggle to dismiss it or cover it up or decry it as "irrational."
Perhaps they ask themselves what they mean by "then I'd be bad" and ﬁnd something
like "I apparently think that if I don't do the laundry then it's evidence that I can't do
anything, and that means I'll lose my job and end up on the street and die cold and
alone, and that's stupid, so..." at which point they start lecturing themselves about
why their concerns are dumb, instead of declaring self-loyalty and standing by
themselves. (If you ﬁnd yourself doing this, I suggest taking your concerns seriously,
and explaining your diﬀerent beliefs earnestly, with the same respect you'd show an
inquisitive child who wants to understand the world but has a few ﬂaws in their
understanding.)
You're still a monkey! You often have inconsistent, strange preferences. Parts of you
often have beliefs that other parts of you don't endorse. That's ok. Decrying your own
inconsistencies is no way to ﬁx them: work with yourself.
So don't settle for being motivated to do something because otherwise you'd "be
bad." Unpack the feeling of "being bad," and ﬁgure out what outcomes you're aiming
for. Figure out what you want to do. Figure out how you want the future to be.
Because at the end of the day, a person "being bad" fails to parse. "Goodness" and
"badness" are not properties of people. People can do terrible things; they can pursue
horrible goals; they can watch with growing despair as they act against their own best
interests; but they do not have a fundamental stone buried deep inside of them which
measures their worth.
Life is not a game of "wind up good at the end." Life is about steering the future.

Residing in the mortal realm
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/residing-in-the-mortal-realm/
The last sevenish posts describe the main tools I have for removing guilt-based
motivation. The common thread running through them can be summed up as follows:
Reside in the mortal realm.
Many people hold themselves to a very diﬀerent standard than they hold others. They
hold themselves accountable for failing to do the psychologically impossible. They fret
over past mistakes and treat themselves as failed gods, rather than ambitious
monkeys. This condemning-of-the-self can lead to great guilt, with all its negative
eﬀects.
My suggestion for dealing with guilt, roughly speaking, is to ﬁrst focus your guilt, by
dispelling the guilt that comes from not doing what other people think you should or
from from false obligations, and shifting all your guilt into guilt about the fact that you
have not yet made the future how you want it to be. Then, once your guilt is focused
there, remember that you are a denizen of the mortal realm.
In the past, you have failed to act as you wished to act. You have failed to make the
best available choices. But these facts have little bearing on what you do next. They
have some bearing, insofar as your memories still hold lessons that can teach you
about how to better steer yourself to steer the world, but they do not say anything
about the color of your soul. They are simply the background knowledge against which
you move forwards, from here, looking only towards the future.
You are a mortal, who often struggles to follow their own will, and your actions set the
course of the entire future. Instead of berating yourself for your shortcomings, ﬁgure
out how to do the best you can given the shortcomings — sometimes by spending
time and eﬀort to ﬁx them (mere willpower seldom suﬃces), and sometimes by taking
them as given and working around them.
Be a mere mortal, and do the best you can anyway. Learn everything your can from
your mistakes, and then forgive yourself your sins, and look only to how much better
you can make the future (knowing what you know now about how you perform in
diﬀerent situations).
Guilt has no place among mortals: we already know we're fallible. We don't need to
suﬀer over that fact: our failings provide only information about what to do next, if we
want to steer the future.
Over the last few months, three diﬀerent people have informed me that I broke their
motivation systems. In short, one found themselves less able to care about what they
were working on, another found themselves unable to force themselves to work,
another found themselves unable to continue spurring themselves on with guilt.
In part, this is working as intended: in the long run, I think that guilt-based motivation
can be harmful. However, my goal is not to simply remove existing motivation
systems: my goal is to replace guilt with something else.

So the question is, without guilt, what can you use for drive? And this brings us to the
penultimate arc of my "replacing guilt" series of posts.
I've already given partial answers to the question "whence internal drive?", when
talking on caring, or about the value of a life, or about caring about something larger
than yourself. Those posts are intended to inspire you and remind you that there's
something worth ﬁghting for, and that you can ﬁght for it even if you lack a burning
passion. That's not the whole picture, though, and in the upcoming arc, I'll touch upon
a diﬀerent aspect of intrinsic motivation.
I think many people are motivated by an intrinsic (often subconscious) desire to be
virtuous, or perhaps by a strong aversion to "being bad." I think many other people
are motivated primarily by whatever obligations currently sit on their plate. They don't
need to ask themselves what they are doing or why; they simply continue fulﬁlling the
obligations in front of them so that life continues proceed. They fulﬁll obligations at
school, they fulﬁll obligations at their jobs, they ﬁnd a spouse, they start a family, they
fulﬁll obligations to their family. The obligations keep ﬂowing in a steady stream, and
there is never any need to soul-search in a grand quest for some sort of deep intrinsic
drive (except, perhaps, during the occasional "midlife crisis," which is a ﬁne
distraction that they're expected to eventually overcome).
Yet here I stand, suggesting that you ditch the notion "being bad" and drop your
obligations entirely, keeping only what remains. But dropping an existing framework is
a far cry from creating a new one, and dropping guilt does not often reveal a
blindingly virtuous non-obligation that you're supposed to pursue instead of what you
were currently pursuing.
In fact, the new framework can't contain "supposed tos" at all. Obligations have been
jettisoned.
So in the upcoming arc, I'm not going to give you something to pursue. Rather, I'm
going to do my best to give you a diﬀerent way of looking at the world. I'm going to
describe a vantage point from which guilt motivation seems quaint, and something
else — maybe cold resolve, maybe hot desire, maybe a diﬀerent drive — guides your
actions instead.
From that vantage point, guilt is alien — and it is only once it seems foreign (rather
than evil) that it be fully replaced.

Being unable to despair
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/being-unable-to-despair/
Sometimes, when people see that their life is about to get a lot harder, they start
buckling down. Other times, they start despairing, or complaining, or preparing
excuses so that they can have one ready when the inevitable failure hits, or giving up
entirely and then failing with abandon. These next few posts assume that you have
the former demeanor, and they might not be helpful to people who are inclined to
respond to new diﬃculties with despair. Remember the law of equal and opposite
advice! (For every person who needs a certain piece of advice, there is someone else
who needs the opposite advice.)
With that said, I'm going to spend a few words giving some tips about how to have the
former demeanor, if you want to. The ﬁrst piece of pertinent advice is that the way
you respond to challenges is context dependent; even if you've already been known to
respond to some problems by despairing, there are likely other problems that you
respond to by buckling down.
There is a speciﬁc mindset that, in my experience, makes it much easier to adopt the
"buckle down" demeanor. This is the mindset where "not doing anything" doesn't
seem like an available option in the action-space. I've written a bit before about how I
think many people think there is a default "rest state", and this is a related concept:
many people seem to think that there is a privileged "don't do anything" action, that
consists of something like curling up into a ball, staying in bed, and refusing to answer
emails. It's much easier to adopt the "buckle down" demeanor when, instead, curling
up in a ball and staying in bed feels like just another action. It's just another way to
respond to the situation, which has some merits and some ﬂaws.
So this is my second piece of advice, if you want to be the sort of person who buckles
down in the face of hardship: see the world in terms of possible responses. See curling
up in bed and ignoring the world as just one possible response, rather than an escape
hatch. Dispel the illusion that some actions are labeled "do nothing," and notice that
those, too, are responses. There is no privileged null choice.
(That's not to say that it's bad to curl up in a ball on your bed and ignore the world for
a while. Sometimes this is exactly what you need to recover. Sometimes it's what the
monkey is going to do regardless of what you decide. The point is that when nature
oﬀers you a choice, there is no "don't choose" option. There are only the options that
nature oﬀers, and all you can do is pick the best of them.)
My third piece of advice is to remember that you reside in the mortal realm. If you get
new information or a new way of looking at the world and you start to feel despair, or
hopelessness, or helpless, or impotent, then it is perfectly OK to respond by curling up
in a corner and feeling sad and scared and small for a little while. That's a ﬁne
response. It doesn't mean that you're not up to the task. Nor does it mean that you
are condemned to despairing forever. You're allowed to feel small sometimes, and
then get back up and keep going, without any need to pretend that things are ﬁne.
We're monkeys. Feeling helpless happens.
Rising to the challenge doesn't mean never feeling helpless. It means pushing on
anyway, even if you feel helpless sometimes.

In my experience, tapping into internal drive often requires tapping into a deep desire
to make the world be diﬀerent, in a world that's very large and very hurting and very
hard to change. When trying to do this, it can be easy to get overwhelmed by the
odds stacked against you — regardless of their scale. (In fact, I have often found that
the cards stacked against me personally — when I feel isolated, lonely, or friendless —
induce as much despair as the cards stacked against anyone who tries to change the
world at large.)
In the next few posts, I'm going to talk about tapping into that internal drive, and this
will entail trying to see the situation for what it really is: which means owning up to
everything stacked against you. If you aren't careful, this might cause you to buckle.
But if you do it right, it can cause you to buckle down instead, and provide a source of
drive.

See the dark world
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/see-the-dark-world/
Consider ﬁctional Carol, who has convinced herself that she doesn't need to worry
about the suﬀering of people who live far away. She works to improve her local
community, and donates to her local church. She's a kind and loving woman, and she
does her part, and (she reasons) that's all anyone can be expected to do.
Now consider ﬁctional Dave, who failed a job interview. When telling his friends the
story, he emphasizes how the interviewers were biased against him, and how they
asked stupid questions.
Meanwhile, driven by hunger, a fox tries to reach some grapes hanging high on the
vine but is unable to, although he leaps with all his strength. As he goes away, he
remarks "Oh, you aren't even ripe yet! I don't need any sour grapes."
All of these reactions — and many others — share a common kernel. Carol, Dave, and
the fox are all inventing reasons why an unpleasant state of aﬀairs is acceptable.
They're not inventing reasons why the world is good, by any means; but they are
putting forth cognitive eﬀort to make it seem tolerable.
Carol would surely tell you that it's terrible that children are suﬀering abroad — but
only after convincing herself that her duty to help them had been discharged.
The fox would tell you that the world is worse for being full of sour grapes — and yet,
he still had to work hard to assure himself that he didn't live in a far worse world,
where the grapes were both ripe and inaccessible.
There's a certain type of darkness in the world that most people simply cannot to see.
It's not the abstract darkness: people will readily acknowledge that the world is
broken, and explain how and why the hated out-group is responsible. And that's
exactly what I'm pointing at: upon seeing that the world is broken, people experience
an impulse to explain the brokenness in a way that relieves the tension. When seeing
that the world is broken, people reﬂexively feel a need to explain. Carol can
acknowledge that there is suﬀering abroad, but this acknowledgement comes part
and parcel with an explanation about why she bears no responsibility. Dave can
acknowledge that he failed to pass the interview, but his mind automatically
generates reasons why this is an acceptable state of aﬀairs.
This is the type of darkness in the world that most people cannot see: they cannot see
a world that is unacceptable. Upon noticing that the world is broken, they reﬂexively
list reasons why it is still tolerable. Even cynicism, I think, can ﬁll this role: I often read
cynicism as an attempt to explain a world full of callous neglect and casual cruelty, in
a framework that makes neglect and cruelty seem natural and expected (and
therefore tolerable).
I call this reﬂexive response "toleriﬁcation," and if you watch for it, you can see it
everywhere.
The sour grapes fallacy is a clear example of toleriﬁcation, but it's only one instance of
the broader class. Toleriﬁcation occurs any time you see something bad in the world

and feel an impulse to explain, especially if that explanation relieves pressure that
would otherwise be placed on you.
Consider, for example, Alice and Bob in my allegory of the dragon. Both have recently
learned that the market value of a life is only a few thousand dollars. Both are
uncomfortable with this, and they reﬂexively tolerify the information in diﬀerent ways.
Bob denies the information, protesting that one can't make decisions by attaching
dollar values to lives, because lives are sacred. This declaration of a sacred value
allows Bob to deny the discrepancy entirely, reject the implied responsibility, and
restore tolerability to the universe.
Alice, by contrast, accepts the data and denies the intuition that lives are sacred. She
notes that if you act like lives are worth more than a few thousand dollars then you'll
save fewer lives than you could, and thus anyone who acts otherwise and wants to
save lives is inconsistent. Therefore, she concludes that she can't treat the intrinsic
value of a life as worth any more than the market price, and grows cynical — not only
are lives non-sacred, she realizes, but they're not worth that much more than a few
thousand cans of coke. Now she can worry less about saving lives: they weren't worth
as much as she thought, anyway. Toleriﬁcation successful.
Notice how their gazes slip to one side or the other, both of them failing to see the
dark world — the one where lives are both nigh invaluable, and priced at $3000. The
one where it's reprehensible to pretend that a life is worth only as much as a few
thousand cans of coke, and this is how you have to price a life if you want to save as
many lives as you can. The world with a grim gap between life's price and life's value.
This is the world that both Alice and Bob both reﬂexively tolerify away from.
In me, toleriﬁcation is toxic to intrinsic motivation. If you want intrinsic drive, I suggest
you train yourself to notice when your gaze slips to one side or the other. When that
happens, focus, and stare directly at the dark world.
Content note: the remainder of this post encourages you to contemplate and
acknowledge signiﬁcant diﬃculties in your own life. I assume that the reader is
resilient in the face of adversity . If acknowledging adversity in your life is currently
liable to harm you, consider skipping the rest of this post.
My favored tool for subverting the impulse to tolerify the intolerable (and thereby
stare directly at the dark world) is to pose myself a "what if" question.
What if I lived in the world where it was both the case that lives are nigh invaluable,
and it costs only a few thousand dollars to save a life?
What if I lived in the world where it was both the case that I failed the interview and it
was because I lacked the requisite skill?
The default impulse, upon learning that I failed the interview, might be to tolerify.
Someone prone to toleriﬁcation might automatically, reﬂexively, start listing ways that
the interview was stacked against them, or reasons why the questions were stupid, or
reasons why they didn't want the job anyway. Then they might jump directly into the
next interview, with excuses already in hand for when they fail that one too. This
illustrates one major way that toleriﬁcation can be harmful: it might prevent you from
seeing what really needs to be done. The person who refuses to tolerify can seriously
consider spending more time practicing, or switching careers. If necessary, they can

acknowledge that they really need to get a job while still dramatically unqualiﬁed, and
decide to play the numbers with full knowledge of what they're doing. If they tolerify,
they have to act indignant when they fail. If they don't, they can face what needs to
be done.
Refusing to tolerify in this situation can be really really hard. Saying "It seems I am not
yet be skilled enough to get a job in this ﬁeld" can be tough, especially when your
livelihood depends upon the opposite being true (and double-especially if you think
that past failures make you a "bad person").
The nice thing about the "what if" question is that I don't need to believe that that's
the actual world when pondering the "what if". I don't need to acknowledge that I am
unqualiﬁed for the job, I can simply ask what would do if I were. This makes it easier
to plan out what I would do if I could see the dark world, and having a plan often
makes it easier to acknowledge that the world I'm living in is dark. (See also: leaving
yourself a line of retreat.)
So, let's run through some what ifs.
What if we lived in the world where it was both the case that (a) unwanted
pregnancies could ruin the lives of both mother and child and (c) unborn children were
moral patients with a right to life? What would you do then?
What if we lived in the world where it was both the case that (a) people are living and
dying in extreme poverty and (b) you really need a new car soon if you want to keep
your job, but you could spare a few thousand dollars if you really had to. What would
you do then?
What if we lived in the world where people do have souls, but they're implemented on
brains made of meat that rots when you die?
What if we lived in the world where evolution built conscious predators, and conscious
prey that suﬀers as it gets eaten alive?
What if almost nobody was evil, but almost everything was broken anyway? What if
the hated out-groups aren't responsible for all the suﬀering?
I'm not claiming that these what-ifs are accurate. Rather, I oﬀer this as a tool for
staring the dark world directly in the face. Imagine the world that is as bad as it might
be. Imagine the world were full of intolerable injustices. What would you do then?
Can you look upon those dark worlds and feel a sense of despair, of the world being
harder to ﬁx than seems acceptable? Do you get a feeling of bracing yourself for
making terrible tradeoﬀs, because there are too many problems and you can't handle
all of them? If so, that's good: that's what it feels like, to see the dark world.
The question is, what would you do then?
I'm not here to oﬀer answers. Maybe your answer is "well in that world I'd stop trying
so hard and move to a cabin in the woods and try to forget how screwed up
everything was." Or maybe your answer is "in that case I'd rise to the challenge, no
matter how terrible the odds." More likely, it's something else entirely. I'm not trying to
feed you answers. I'm trying to help you refuse to tolerify, because there is a source of
resolve that comes only when you see the dark world.

I have to believe this falsehood, because otherwise I would be unable to go on.
This is something that I hear fairly frequently, either to my face, or in popular media.
"I have to believe in God; otherwise there would be no meaning in my life." Or "It's a
good thing humans are unrealistically optimistic; we wouldn't be able to handle
reality." Or "I have to believe that I'm going to get this job; otherwise I wouldn't be
able to continue trying." Or,
"All right," said Susan. "I'm not stupid. You're saying humans need... fantasies to
make life bearable."
really? as if it was some kind of pink pill? no. humans need fantasy to be human.
to be the place where the falling angel meets the rising ape.
"Tooth fairies? Hogfathers? Little—"
yes. as practice. you have to start out learning to believe the little lies.
"So we can believe the big ones?"
yes. justice. mercy. duty. that sort of thing.
"They're not the same at all!"
you think so? then take the universe and grind it down to the ﬁnest powder and
sieve it through the ﬁnest sieve and then show me one atom of justice, one
molecule of mercy. and yet—Death waved a hand. and yet you act as if there is
some ideal order in the world, as if there is some...some rightness in the universe
by which it may be judged.
"Yes, but people have got to believe that, or what's the point—"
my point exactly.
— Terry Pratchett, Hogfather
 
People say they need to tolerify, because otherwise they wouldn't be able to handle
the intolerable world.
But that's false. Acknowledging that the world is unacceptable will not kill you; the
world is already as unacceptable as it is. Remember the litany of Gendlin.
So face the dark world. See the intolerable.
Take up the burden that is supposed to be unbearable. Don't excuse the world, don't
come up with reasons why it's OK. Let it be not OK.
What happens then? What do you feel then?
Is there a sense of despair or helpessness? Is there a sense of hot fury or cold resolve?
Is there a sense of being tiny in the face of a problem that is large?
Live there, in the face of the intolerable. Don't struggle to make it acceptable, just live
with the bad world, while buckling down rather than buckling.

It is there, while staring the dark world in the face, that I ﬁnd a deep well of intrinsic
drive. It is there that my resolve and determination come to me, rather than me
having to go hunting for them.
I ﬁnd it amusing that "we need lies because we can't bear the truth" is such a
common refrain, given how much of my drive stems from my response to attempting
to bear the truth.
I ﬁnd that it's common for people to tell themselves that they need the lies in order to
bear reality. In fact, I bet that many of you can think of one thing oﬀ the top of your
heads that you're intentionally tolerifying, because the truth is too scary to even
consider. (I've seen at least a dozen failed relationships dragged out for months and
months due to this eﬀect.)
I say, if you want the intrinsic drive, drop the illusion. Refuse to tolerify. Face the facts
that you feared you would not be able to handle. You are likely correct that they will
be hard to bear, and you are likely correct that attempting to bear them will change
you. But that change doesn't need to break you. It can also make you stronger, and
fuel your resolve.
So see the dark world. See everything intolerable. Let the urge to tolerify it build, but
don't relent. Just live there in the intolerable world, refusing to tolerate it. See whether
you feel that growing, burning desire to make the world be diﬀerent. Let parts of
yourself harden. Let your resolve grow. It is here, in the face of the intolerable, that
you will be able to tap into intrinsic motivation.

Choose without suﬀering
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/choose-without-suﬀering/
Imagine Eve, who works a service industry job. Her manager tells her, at the last
minute and without warning, that she has to staﬀ an event tomorrow in a town a few
hour's drive from where she lives, and she has to wake up at 5am to get there on
time.
Let's further suppose that she's on shaky footing with her manager as it is, and so she
is posed with the following choice: she can either wake up at 5am tomorrow and go to
work, or she can lose her job.
Imagine Eve's demeanor, upon learning this fact. It's likely dour, to say the least.
She's probably grumpy and annoyed and malcontent, and she's likely to vent and
complain all evening. She'll likely spend a lot of cognitive eﬀort tolerifying the
situation, convincing herself either that it's not going to be that bad to wake up early,
or that her manager is a terrible person.
This is a common occurrence, I think: if you give humans the choice between bad and
worse, they get grumpy.
When people ﬁnd that none of their options cross a certain "acceptability" threshold,
they get frustrated.
This, I think, is part of why toleriﬁcation is such a common human response to
unfortunate situations. In an intolerable world, none of your options seem acceptable:
so you tolerify, until at least one option (perhaps indignance, perhaps cynicism,
perhaps doing nothing diﬀerently) passes the acceptablility threshold. Only then are
you able to act.
This behavior won't do, for someone living in a dark world. If you're going to live in a
dark world, then it's very important to learn how to choose the best action available to
you without any concern for how good it is in an absolute sense.
When given a choice between bad and worse, you need to be able to choose "bad",
without qualm.
I think that one of the big reasons why people get annoyed when none of their options
pass the "acceptable" threshold is they're often failing to see a hidden third
alternative, and some part of them knows that this might be the case. In this setting,
the frustration might even be useful, if it puts them in a mental state where they
search more fervently for an escape hatch.
Furthermore, by acting ﬂustered, people may well be able to draw other humans to
their aid, and the additional assistance can often help make the situation better.
So frustration in the face of a choice between bad and worse may be a useful
response in many situations. (At the least, it was useful enough to our ancestors.)
Indeed, when you're oﬀered the choice between bad and worse, the ﬁrst thing to do is
look for a third option and the second thing to do is ask for help. Find shortcuts. Try to
cheat. Call in the cavalry, if you can.

But once you determine that you really have been oﬀered a choice between bad and
worse, and that there are no other options —
Then it is useful to be able to choose "bad," without suﬀering over it.
The ﬁrst step to being able to choose the best option available without suﬀering, is to
simply understand the distinction. Next time you ﬁnd yourself feeling ﬂustered
because none of your options pass an absolute acceptability threshold, pause and
reframe, and look at the relative acceptability of your actions instead. Simply knowing
the distinction and watching out for it in real life may well be enough.
For me, another useful tool for choosing without suﬀering is to ask a "what if" question
about a hypothetical universe, before making a choice in the real world. Let's say I'm
trying to eliminate extreme poverty, and none of my actions seem good. I might say
to myself, "imagine you lived in a world where all your choices led to bad outcomes;
what would you do then?" I can improve the lives of these three people, and then a
million people will die of preventable disease anyway. Or I can try to alter the ﬂow of
politics, and then a million people will die of preventable disease anyway. Or I can put
money into researching preventable diseases, and then a million people will die of
preventable diseases anyway. No matter what I do, at least a million people will die of
preventable diseases. What would I do in that world?
Clearly, the answer is "whatever action saves the most lives." I sometimes ﬁnd it
easier to frame my real problems as if they were hypothetical, identify the answer
there, and then apply that to the real world.
In the hypothetical worlds where there are no third alternatives and all the actions
before you, it doesn't matter that all the actions lead to bad outcomes. The best
choice is still quite clear: take the action that leads to the best outcome, and take it
without remorse. In the hypothetical, conﬁdent that there are no alternatives, it's
quite easy to imagine selecting the least bad option from a terrible lot. In fact, it's
easy to imagine doing this without any impulse to complain or struggle, but instead
only a grim resolve to do the best you can in a bad situation.
So in the real world, do the same. Notice when you're measuring your options against
what you think should happen; notice when you're measuring the futures you can
attain against the futures you want to attain; and treat that as a cue to reframe. Look
at your actions available options again, and stop measuring them against an objective
ideal, and start measuring them against each other. Look for cheats, look for third
alternatives, look for ways out...
...and then, when you're done and you've considered all available options,
simply take the best action available.
Take it, without suﬀering, no matter how bad it is.
That is all there is to do.

Detach the grim-o-meter
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/detach-the-grim-o-meter/
I'm betting that the last three posts have given many readers an incorrect impression
about my demeanor. It's easy to read those posts and conclude that I must be a grim,
brooding character who goes around with his jaw set all day long.
Which is understandable, but silly. You don't need to carry a grim demeanor to draw
strength from seeing the dark world. It's quite possible to deeply want the world to be
diﬀerent than it is, and tap into a deep well of cold resolve, and still also be curious,
playful, and relaxed in turn.
This isn't a story, and we don't need to pretend to archetypes.
I've met many who are under the impression that when you realize the world is in
deep trouble, you're obligated to respond by feeling more and more grim. Like a
movie about a detective that's trying to save a kidnapped child: as the detective
learns that the child is in more and more danger, they lock their jaw and become more
and more grim and determined. Their respite comes only when the child is rescued.
That's narrative thinking, and we aren't in a narrative. You can break the trope. (In
fact, I encourage you to break tropes as soon as you realize that you're acting them
out.)
Many people seem to have this internal grim-o-meter which measures how grim the
state of the world is, and they dutifully try to keep this calibrated. When they hear
that they might be failing a class, they get a bit more grim, and this helps them buckle
down. When they hear that there was an earthquake in Napal, they get a little more
grim, and they maybe even feel guilty if they can't feel appropriately grim for
appropriately long.
I say, it's good to have a grim-o-meter, but stop calibrating it against the state of the
world. That's a terrible plan!
I mean, look at humanity at large. People are killing each other like it's going out of
style, while millions die from disease each year and civilization careens towards self-
destruction.
Now look at your grim-o-meter. It has, like, seven diﬀerent settings. Maybe twelve, on
a good day.
That detective in the movie about the kidnapped child might be able to faithfully use a
twelve-setting grim-o-meter to track the grimness of their own situation.
But the real world? The one with billions of people each with rich inner lives, and
astronomical future potential hanging by a pale blue thread in Time? There's no way
you can justiﬁably connect a twelve-setting grim-o-meter to that.
And what if you could? Would your grim-o-meter always be set to "maximum
grimness," at least until humanity makes it through the gauntlet? That doesn't sound
very fun or useful. Would you rather calibrate the grim-o-meter so that it adequately
captures the normal range of variance in the human condition over your lifetime?

Because then your grimness is likely to ﬂuctuate wildly in response to events that
have little relevance to your daily life (such as aggregate demand shocks in China).
That also doesn't sound very fun or useful.
Look: that's not what your grim-o-meter is for. It's not supposed to be attached to the
global state of the world. Feeling grim or carefree in proportion to the aggregate
disparity or well-being on the planet is diﬃcult, impractical, and mostly useless.
Your grim-o-meter is designed for local occasions. You need to get more grim (and
more buckled down) as the work immediately in front of you gets harder, and you
need to get less grim (so that you can spend time recharging and relaxing) whenever
you have the aﬀordance to recharge and relax. That's the point of the grimness
setting.
Remember, the grim-o-meter was made for you, not you for it. What's the point of
grimness? The point is to be able to buckle down when down needs buckling. And
buckling down is something you need to do occasionally, if you want to get things
done. But so is being curious, and being playful, and being calm. You're still a monkey,
remember?
The world is dark and gritty, but that doesn't mean that you need to be dark and gritty
to match. This isn't a book, and you can adopt whatever demeanor you need to adopt
to get the job done.
You can look at the bad things in this world, and let cold resolve ﬁll you — and then go
on a picnic, and have a very pleasant afternoon. That would be a little weird, but you
could do it! The resolve is a useful source of motivation, but you don't need to adopt a
permanently grim demeanor in order to wield it. In fact, personal eﬀectiveness is all
about having the right demeanor at the right time.
I suggest a mix of playfulness, curiosity, relaxation, calm, and yes, grim
determination.
I also personally recommend a healthy dose of dark humor. Everybody's dying, after
all.

Simply locate yourself
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/simply-locate-yourself/
Imagine I oﬀer you the following bet: I'll roll a fair ten-sided die. If it comes up 1-9, you
win a million dollars. If it comes up 0, you lose $10,000. (If you're signiﬁcantly richer
or poorer than the median person, adjust the numbers up or down accordingly, such
that winning is very great and losing hurts a lot, but is manageable.) Imagine that you
take the bet, because those odds are ridiculously in your favor. Now imagine that I roll
the die, and you watch it rolling, and rolling, and rolling, until it starts to settle, and
then it settles... on 0.
Imagine the sinking feeling you might get, as you see the zero, and realize that you
have to give me ten thousand dollars. Maybe you suddenly feel uncomfortable. Maybe
you're unwilling to meet my gaze. Maybe you're angry, or slightly sick to your
stomach. Maybe some part of you is pushing against reality, trying to deny it, willing
the past to change.
Now imagine a second bet. This time, imagine a world that has ﬁgured out cloning and
cryonics and space travel. The bet works as follows: I put you to sleep, and then I
separate you into ten identical copies (none of which have any more claim to being
the original than any other), and then I put them all into stasis. Your possessions are
replicated ten ways, and the ten yous are put on ten ships to ten diﬀerent (already-
colonized) planets. On nine of those planets, the local you will be placed in a room
with blue walls, and given your possessions along with a million extra dollars. On one
of those planets, the local you will be placed in a room with red walls, and will have
$10,000 removed from their possessions. Then all ten yous will be awoken. Thus, nine
copies of you will gain a million dollars, and one copy of you will lose ten thousand
dollars.
Imagine that you understand this procedure, and consent to it. You're put to sleep,
and split into ten copies, put into stasis, sent to ten planets, and revived from stasis.
You wake slowly, and haven't opened your eyes yet. You know that nine yous will wake
in a blue room and ﬁnd themselves rich, and one you will wake in a red room and ﬁnd
themselves poor, and you don't know which you you are. You open your eyes, and the
walls are... red.
In one sense, you've lost exactly the same sort of bet as the ﬁrst bet. But there's a
very diﬀerent way that you might be feeling. In the second bet, instead of feeling a
sinking feeling and a desire to push against reality, you may simply nod, and say "ah,
I'm the me in the red room."
Instead of treating the red walls as an unwelcome message about reality failing to go
the way you wanted, you might treat them as a simple indicator of where you ended
up. Instead of feeling despair, you may simply feel like you've ﬁgured out which you
you are.
Most people seem to treat most of their observations as Bet 1 type observations: they
treat their observations as information about how the universe turned out to be, which
may be quite a bit worse than they were hoping it would turn out. They feel despair,

or resistance, or victimized by an unfair universe. Part of them tries to tolerify, some
part of them ﬂinches away from facing reality, and so on.
There's another way to treat your observations. It's the Bet 2 way: treat them simply
as information about where you ended up.
Imagine, on the one hand, Bet 1 as described above. Now imagine the same bet, but
with a special die that generates ten copies of you (in diﬀerent branches of the
multiverse that are identical except for the number this die shows, separated such
that the universes within them can never interact), such that nine of them will win a
million dollars and one will lose ten thousand dollars.
Notice how someone who loses the former bet may try to push against reality, while
someone who loses the latter bet has a much easier time simply saying "Huh, I guess
I'm the one in the 0 branch. Such was the price for nine out of ten multiverse
branches to have rich versions of me, and now I will pay it."
But these are, more or less, the same bet. Why do they feel so diﬀerent?
I say, always treat your bets like the latter sort of bet. Stop struggling against the bad
news. Treat it not as bad news about how reality went, but rather treat it as you would
treat information about where in the multiverse you ended up. Try being a new
homunculus. Look around you and ﬁgure out where you just landed, regardless of
where past you thought they should have landed. Often, the place will be in worse
shape than past-you was expecting, but that has little bearing on what you do next
(aside from updating your current anticipations such that future-you is less wrong).
Imagine you're a new homunculus that has just landed in a branch of the multiverse
where things were going poorly—maybe you recently lost social status, or made a
choice that had worse eﬀects than you expected, just before the new homunculus
teleported in. This is an uncomfortable place to ﬁnd yourself in! What do you do next?
Would you immediately throw a ﬁt? What's the point of that? You just teleported into
this part of the multiverse; how is struggling against the past supposed to help you?
This is part of what detaching the grim-o-meter is all about: if you found yourself in a
grim part of the multiverse, what would you do? Would you go around frowning and
being dour all day? No? Because that sounds silly? Then there's no need to do that
here!
Your observations are not messages that the world is full of terrible unfair luck. Your
observations are simply indicators as to where you are. They're the data that you
need to locate yourself.
Spoiler alert, you're currently located in a fairly precarious portion of the multiverse,
where sentient beings are suﬀering and dying, and the future is hanging by a thread.
It's worth cleaning this place up a bit, I think. But don't suﬀer about the poor state of
aﬀairs! Consider: if you were teleported to a precarious branch of the multiverse, what
would you do upon arriving? Would you make sure to have a good time anyway?
Would you do whatever you could to help out? Well then you're in luck! You did just
arrive at a precarious part of the multiverse, and those are both things that you can
do here.
When you get bad news, don't suﬀer over it. It's not unfair, it's not passing judgement,
it's not a signal that everything sucks, it's not making the future worse. It's just telling
you where you live.

And recently, you've ended up in the same part of the multiverse as I have. It is fairly
nice, as parts of the multiverse go: it supports life, and things are better now than
they were in many of the past points along our timeline. Nevertheless, it does look a
bit precarious, and it sure does need some tidying up.
So, let's get to work!

Have no excuses
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/have-no-excuses/
Except in a very few [tennis] matches, usually with world-class performers, there
is a point in every match (and in some cases it's right at the beginning) when the
loser decides he's going to lose. And after that, everything he does will be aimed
at providing an explanation of why he will have lost. He may throw himself at the
ball (so he will be able to say he's done his best against a superior opponent). He
may dispute calls (so he will be able to say he's been robbed). He may swear at
himself and throw his racket (so he can say it was apparent all along he wasn't in
top form). His energies go not into winning but into producing an explanation, an
excuse, a justiﬁcation for losing.
― C. Terry Warner, Bonds That Make Us Free
 
Throughout high school and college, I noticed that many of my peers seemed like they
were trying hard, but they weren't trying hard to learn content or pass classes — they
were trying hard to make sure that they had good excuses and cover stories prepared
for when they failed. Seeing this, I resolved that I would never excuse my own failures
to myself — not even if I had a very good excuse. If you have an excuse prepared, you
will be tempted to fall back on it. An excuse makes failure more acceptable, in some
way. It's a license to fail.
If you really need to succeed on a task, then I suggest that you resolve to refuse to
excuse your failure, in the event that you do fail. Even if the failure was
understandable. Even if you failed for unfair reasons, due to things you couldn't have
foreseen. Simply refuse to speak the excuse. Understand your errors, and learn from
them, but if people demand to know why you failed, say only, "I'm sorry. I wasn't good
enough." You may add "and I think I know what I did wrong, and I'll work to ﬁx it, and
I'll do better next time," but only if that's true.
Don't add anything else: if you want to play to win, you have to refuse to acknowledge
excuses. If you were excused then you were helpless, and you couldn't have done
better, and you can't learn to do better next time. Thus, I suggest that you become
incapable of believing an excuse, lest you automatically slip into the game of making
sure your failure will be explainable, rather than making sure you succeed.
"But sometimes bad luck just happens!" the one protests. We can imagine a person
who took a bet that pays out $1,000,000 nine times out of ten and costs $10,000
otherwise. We can imagine them losing. We can imagine them saying "I should have
gotten the money!", and feeling upset, and complaining that the dice went against
them, and cursing the fates. We can imagine them loudly trying to make sure that
everybody present knows that the bet was worth taking, to make sure that their loss is
excusable. And this person will be playing to ensure that their actions were
acceptable; rather than playing to win.
I suggest, don't try to excuse bad luck. Don't call foul. Don't say that life was unfair.
You're welcome to say "I'm sorry, I made a bet and I lost. I'd make the bet again,
though, knowing what I did then." Then you're still owning the choice. You're owning

the failure, which is the important part. Only by owning the failure can you hope to
adjust and do better next time: if you feel like you are allowed to curse the dice every
time they go against you, and have your gabling excused as terrible luck by your
peers ("oh they're such an unlucky person it's not their fault...") then you're never
going to learn when to bet and when to abstain.
I suggest cultivating your mental habits such that it feels bad to check whether or not
your failure will have an excuse. Refuse to have excuses. Refuse to cover your failures.
Only then, without expected social protection, do you really start trying to ﬁgure out
how to win.
"No really, sometimes unforeseen circumstances arise!", the one protests again. We
can imagine someone who was totally planning to get their paper done on time, but
who got violently ill. It's true: unforeseen circumstances can wreck your plans. But you
know about the planning fallacy (or if you didn't, you do now). You've been a human
being for a long time. You know the background rates on illnesses, and on unforeseen
circumstances in general. Why didn't you work slack into your plans? Why couldn't
you see those bullets coming in advance?
If you did work a lot of extra slack into your plans, and you still got burned anyway by
extraordinary circumstances, then as before, you are welcome to answer "I took a
gamble and I lost, and I'd take the same gamble again at the same odds." You're
welcome to calculate that the risk is worth the beneﬁt, and then pay the price when
your debts are called in.
If you didn't work in the necessary leeway, then you're allowed to say "I'm sorry, I
messed up." You're allowed to add "and I learned something, and I will do better next
time," if that's true.
Will you actually ever learn to beat the planning fallacy, if you allow yourself to use
excuses? Will you actually visualize the possible failures, and take an outside view,
and learn to see the bullets coming before they hit you? Or will you simply expect
extenuating circumstances to arise, and feel relieved when they do, because a
plausible excuse has presented itself?
I have found that it's usually in the moment when I refuse to make excuses even if I
do fail, that I start really trying to win in advance.
"But people want excuses. They're social creatures! They want to know what
happened!", the one protests.
Sometimes. Sometimes people really want you to provide them some excuse, or at
least some explanation. But even here, be careful: I have noticed that my friends
often help me try to excuse myself, for one reason or another, and I think that giving
in to this pressure can be harmful.
Imagine someone who failed to exit an abusive relationship, despite three years of
trauma. After they successfully exit, their friends are likely to be ﬁrst in line with
condolences along the lines of "they were gaslighting you" and "there wasn't anything
you could have done" and "how could you have known what to do?"
They are providing excuses, and these are toxic. They rob you of your power. They rob
you of your ability to say "actually, I could have known, if I had been thinking more

clearly. I could have acted diﬀerently, if I had known better. And that's the good part,
because it means that I am not a helpless victim, because it means that I can learn
how to become stronger. Because it means that I cannot be trapped in that sort of
situation again."
Excuses rob you of your agency. Yes, many people will try to get excuses out of you, if
they perceive you as putting too much pressure on yourself. But that pressure is
precisely the impetus to learn and adapt, and if you can bear it, then I suggest you do.
There are situations where failing to generate excuses will cost you socially, especially
if you're in the presence of people who have recently been generating excuses for
themselves. If three students give thin excuses for why they didn't ﬁnish their project
on time, and you say only "I'm sorry, I wasn't good enough, I think I know what I did
wrong, I'll do better next time;" then they are liable to glare at you. In refusing to
generate an excuse when everyone else is doing so, you violate some unspoken pact
of mediocrity.
Sometimes, other people need you to make excuses in order to help excuse the fact
that they are making excuses, and if you violate this norm, they ﬁnd themselves faced
with their own shortcomings. This can lead to some uncomfortable situations, and the
best advice I can oﬀer you for those, is that they provide a wonderful opportunity for
self-signaling that you will refuse to excuse your actions even under intense social
pressures.
Note, too, that in many other situations, refusing to generate excuses gains you lots of
social status. Yes, there are places where people view refusal to generate an excuse
as a violation of the solemn pact of mediocrity, but I have found that the people I can
gain most from dealing with, are by and large people who have a deep appreciation
and respect for those who live up to their errors.
Excuses have you looking out to the world to explain your failure, rather than
revealing the weak points in yourself. Did the unexpected happen? Then learn how to
expect better next time. Were you betrayed? Learn how to build tighter social bonds,
and learn how to see betrayals coming sooner next time. Did the dice turn against
you? Then own up to your bet and make sure you're only making worthwhile gambles.
For many, the mantra of "ﬁnd the failure in yourself, rather than in the world" will be
harmful and destructive. If you are motivated primarily by guilt or shame, then
seriously consider ignoring this post's advice. If you are prone to buckling instead of
buckling down, then seriously consider ignoring this post's advice. If you are
struggling with your self-image and your sense of self-worth, if you think some people
are bad, if you ﬂinch away from seeing the dark world, then seriously consider
ignoring this post's advice. Or if "ﬁnd the failure in yourself" feels bad or destructive at
the moment for any other reason, then please ignore this post.
But if you are done with guilt motivation, and comfortable with the fact that we are
not yet gods, and capable of detaching the grim-o-meter, then I strongly suggest that
you have no excuses. Find the ﬂaws inside yourself. Don't tolerify them. Accept them,
and plan ways to address or route around them. If you can't see what you need to do
better next time, then it's going to be tough to do better next time.

This is part of the toolset that I use to replace guilt motivation: play to win. Don't play
to excuse your loss.
You don't need to win every time — but you do need to learn every time.
If you ﬁnd yourself trying to proclaim circumstance unfair, explaining how you could
not possibly have seen this coming, then stop in your tracks. An explanation of how
you couldn't possibly have seen this coming is a social device, an attempt to ensure
that others still think you are OK, that they think your previous actions were
acceptable. It's ﬁne to play that social game; social games occasionally need to be
played. But ﬁrst, ﬁgure out how you could have actually seen that thing coming, next
time. That's the important part.
Excuses are a social artifact, a way to ensure that you don't lose face when you fail.
But we're not here to win a social game.
Despite what all the monkey instincts might tell you, you're not playing Life in a
competition against all the other monkeys.
You're playing Life with the universe, and the stakes are the entire future.
In the end, you won't be measured by how good your excuses were for all the things
that didn't turn out the way you wanted.
You'll be judged only by what actually happens (as will we all).
"It's not an excuse, it's an explanation."
Explanations are excuses.
Don't get me wrong, it's very important to understand your failures. Note, though, that
there's a big diﬀerence between "understanding" that your stupid knee was acting up
and the sun was in your eyes and luck turned against you, and understanding that you
didn't train hard enough or anticipate adverse conditions well enough.
When trying to understand your failures, it's important to ﬁgure out what you could
have done better, rather than generating a list of reasons you never could have won.
If there were unforeseen circumstances, understand why you couldn't foresee them. If
your knee was acting up, learn how to either address that next time or work it into
your expectations.
(And be very wary, when ﬁguring out what you could have done better, for hints of
destructiveness and fatalism in your tone. Imagine someone who is betrayed, and
shouts "well I guess now I've learned to never trust anyone ever again forever!" For all
their guise of having learned, they are harming themselves. It seems to me that this
self-harm has something in common with an excuse: it gives a false veneer of locating
a problem internally ("I am too kind and trusting") while actually identifying the
problem in the world ("the world is bad"). The right lesson to learn is likely never
"become completely unable to trust," it is likely more along the lines of "learn how to
build tighter friendships" or "learn how to read humans better." It can be often useful
to check the advice you just gave yourself to see whether it was obviously
destructive, before following it.)

The point of understanding your failure is to learn how to act better next time, and I
recommend that you understand your failures whenever possible. But don't explain
them away, and don't excuse them.
If you want to succeed, stop generating reasons why you never could have won, and
play to win.

Come to your terms
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/come-to-your-terms/
Once, a friend of mine decided to make a drastic career change by teaching
themselves a bunch of new skills from scratch, (with occasional assistance from me).
They ran into occasional diﬃculties along the way, one of them being that they could
not consider the possibility of failure without feeling fear.
The possibility of failing — of investing months in the eﬀort, with nothing to show for
it, and then having nowhere left to turn — weighed heavily on them. It wore them
down, it caused great stress, it induced panic attacks. Sometimes, they were
incapacitated to the point that they could hardly think.
This wasn't completely unreasonable: they had no safety net and no margin for error,
and they had good reasons to fear for their personal safety in the event of failure. The
problem was not that their fears were irrational. The problem was that they couldn't
think them.
I encouraged them to try facing their fears, and they did, but they found that coming
to terms with the worst was impossible. They buckled, rather than buckling down. So
consider that a content note: the exercise I describe in this post may not be possible
or helpful for you.
But it has been very helpful for me, and I continue to think that if my friend had been
able to truly come to terms with the worst case scenario they had in mind, to imagine
it in detail and accept it as a possibility, then they would have had a much easier time
managing that stress.
So here's my advice: Think the unthinkable. Consider that which is painful to consider.
Figure out what, exactly, is at stake. Weigh the consequences. Come to terms with
them.
I'm not suggesting that you convince yourself the worst case actually wouldn't be that
bad. I'm not suggesting that you tell yourself a story about how you could handle the
worst. I'm saying, come to terms with what could happen. Imagine the worst case, in
detail; learn to weigh it on your scales; accept that if you fail things could go very
poorly; and then maybe those bad outcomes will loosen their grip on you.
If you ever notice yourself following the same pattern as my friend — if you ever
notice an outcome so terrible that you can't even consider it without panicking, then I
suggest that you pause, take a deep breath, and consider that outcome.
Visualize it in full detail. Don't need to excuse it. Don't tell yourself it wouldn't be your
fault. Don't tell yourself it would be ﬁne. Don't make up a story about how you'd
handle it successfully. Just imagine the worst.
People close to you might get hurt. You could die. Lots of people could die. If bad
outcomes are in the possibility space, internalize that now. Come to terms with that
terrible fact as soon as you can. You want to get into a mental state where if the bad
outcome comes to pass, you will only nod your head and say "I knew this card was in
the deck, and I knew the odds, and I would make the same bets again, given the same

opportunities." If you need to panic, panic once and get it over with. Otherwise, fear
will strike again every time the bad outcome moves a millimeter closer, and that fear
may debilitate you or incapacitate you at a crucial moment.
It's the thoughts you can't think that control you most, and it's the outcomes you can't
consider that weigh heaviest on your scales.
An outcome that you can't consider without panicking — failing a class, crashing a car,
destroying the family business — weighs inﬁnitely heavily in your considerations. You
can't even think in the direction of allowing the bad thing to happen, without
encountering a cloying fear that steers your thoughts away. It is as if the bad outcome
has inﬁnite weight on your scales. Your thoughts become censored; you become
unable to rationally weigh the risks and gambles.
Once you've fully considered the terrible outcome, its weight on your scales becomes
ﬁnite. It may remain heavy, it may be the overriding concern in your life, it may still
dominate your actions. But once you've weighed the outcome, it can only dominate
your actions if you decide that that's rational, after weighing the possibilities and
tradeoﬀs.
And maybe, after seriously considering the terrible outcome, it will stop dominating
your actions. Maybe it will seem less terrifying once you drag it into the light. Maybe it
will seem more manageable after you consider how you'd actually manage it. Maybe
you'll notice that the outcome wasn't as terrifying as it seemed at a distance.
In my line of work, I occasionally ﬁnd myself in conversations with powerful people in
situations where the outcome of the conversation has some small chance of
dramatically aﬀecting the future of humanity and all earth-originating life. The ﬁrst
time I found myself in one of these conversations, I was fairly shaken afterwards.
During the conversation, there was a sensation not unlike the one I got as a young
driver on the interstate, realizing that I could, with a trivial twist of my hands, steer
the car into oncoming traﬃc. After the conversation, there was a fear that had a
lingering eﬀect on my thoughts. I was jumpier. My actions were less considered. I was
ﬂustered.
A friend of mine (who had been through this before) noticed, and asked me whether
I'd ever really come to terms with the fact that I just might set into motion a chain of
events that leads to the end of the world.
I said no.
But, amusingly enough, I had spent time coming to terms with the fact that I might
ruin my own life, and die old and bitter and unaccomplished.
I remember that ritual quite well: I was 18 at the time, and I had (a few years prior)
decided to dedicate my life to changing the world in a big way. I was aware of the
odds stacked against me, and I was aware of the success rates, and I was fully aware
of the fact that, in all likelihood, I was going to fail, and my ideas were going to prove
defunct, and my plans were never going to come to fruition.
I imagined that I could well end up a bitter old man, bemoaning plans that should
have worked, to people who only scoﬀed. Now, I also planned not to become that

bitter old man — but in those days, I wasn't yet sure how much control I'd gain over
my own mind, and I saw lots of bitter old men around me. I was wary that my plans to
avoid bitterness would also fail, and I'd become bitter and old despite my best eﬀorts.
As I attempted to get a few diﬀerent schemes started, and I noticed myself holding
back a part of myself, in case my plan was just too crazy, in case I would be too
harshly judged for trying. Introspecting, I concluded that I was resisting because I was
afraid of ruining my own life.
So, knowing that a chance of becoming a bitter old man with little money, no respect,
and nothing to show for it was one of the prices I might need to pay, I decided to
come to terms with that fact once and for all. I spent time imagining this outcome in
detail. I didn't try to explain it to myself, I didn't try to tell myself stories about how I'd
avoid the outcome, I didn't try to tell myself it would be OK. I just pictured what would
happen, considered the cost, weighed the price, and deemed the possibility of failure
a price worth paying.
I didn't convince myself it would be OK, but I did decide that a chance of a not-OK
outcome was a price worth paying.
And then those fears released their grip on me.
So when I was shaken by that high-stakes conversation, and my friend asked whether
I had ever come to terms with the fact that I might set into motion a chain of events
that leads to the end of the world, I laughed, and said no, but that I had done
something similar, and that I knew the ritual. It was a simple task to repeat it, to go
through the same mental motions but with larger stakes in mind.
Now, I'm a bit harder to shake.
(I'm sure this was not the only way I could have gotten used to high-stakes
conversations, and undoubtably exposure alone would have eventually had a similar
eﬀect. Nevertheless, this mental ritual sped up the process quite a bit, and I'm under
the impression that it's helped me think more clearly when making high-stakes
decisions across the board.)
So, I say, if there are outcomes before you that seem unthinkably terrible, then come
to your terms with them. Don't explain them, don't excuse them, don't tolerify them,
simply visualize them, and come to terms with the prices that you might need to pay.
You may be hurt. People you love may be hurt. You might break things that can't be
ﬁxed. The world might actually end. The point is not to convince yourself that you
could handle the worst if it came, because maybe you won't be able to handle it. The
point is simply to know what the worst case looks like.
If you know what it looks like, you can do your best to avoid it. The outcomes you
can't consider control your actions. If you want to avoid the worst outcomes, you need
to be able to weigh all the outcomes on the scales.
(For those of you who are wondering, fear not; my friend ultimately succeeded in
switching careers.)

Transmute guilt into resolve
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/transmute-guilt-i/
A friend of mine came to me and said that he cares about his immediate friends, and
he cares about humanity in the abstract, but he has trouble caring for most people.
They seemed too shallow, too bitter, too spiteful to be worth an eﬀort.
He'd been a sixth grade teacher, so I asked, "What about when they were eleven?
Were they worth an eﬀort then?"
"Yes," he answered adamantly. Or, most could still be salvaged at eleven, though
there are some that you'd need to get to even earlier, if you wanted to save them
from the shallowness and the learned helplessness and the death of curiosity.
"So then we live in a world that mishandles its youth, that turns them from bright
children full of potential into empty shells. What are your feelings about that process,
and the people subjected to it?"
His answer, more or less, was "A bit of anger, a bit of nothing-I-can-do-about-it, and a
bit of victim-blaming, which I don't endorse."
Those last two emotions are very interesting: Why assure yourself that there is
nothing you can do about the problem, if you don't care about the people who are
harmed? Why assure yourself that it is their fault, if you stop caring about people once
they are lost?
These seem like defense mechanisms, to me — defense mechanisms my friend
generated unconsciously, because it was too painful look at bitter shallow adults and
see lost mistreated eleven-year-olds.
Most of the time, if something is hurting you, I recommend making it stop. There is
one exception, though.
Imagine walking past a beggar on the street. They're dirty and downtrodden;
weathered but not much older than you. They ask you for change as you pass by.
This causes a certain type of pain in people — enough pain that most people develop
some sort of coping mechanism. Some people pretend they didn't see or hear the
beggar. Some give an apology, some make up an excuse about not having any money.
Some shove their hands in their pockets and drag out some spare change, so that
they may discharge their moral duty.
Other people cope with cynicism or bitterness — the sight of a beggar reminds them
of the failings of the hated out group, the people who voted for the Wrong Political
Party in the local elections. Still others cope with a wave of guilt, shorting out the pain,
because the guilt seems easier to bear.
My suggestion, this week, is notice that impulse. Notice the impulse to look away, to
ignore, to make an excuse, to assure yourself that there's nothing you can do, to
blame the hated out-group.

Resist the impulse, and acknowledge the pain. Sit with the pain. Don't excuse yourself
from it, don't tell yourself a story about how there's nothing you can do or about how
your attention and eﬀort can be better spent helping other people elsewhere. That
may be true, but it's another coping mechanism, and it also shorts out the pain.
Instead, I suggest sitting with the pain, and transmuting it into resolve.
There are many people for whom guilt is the right response, when ignoring a beggar. If
you're not doing anything to leave the world nicer than it was when you found it, if
you're not doing anything to help your fellow human beings, if you're not doing
anything to shape the grand story of Humanity as it plays out all around you, and if
you want to be helping, then guilt is a healthy reminder that you've betrayed some
part of yourself.
This is why my "replacing guilt" series began by addressing the listless guilt, all those
months ago. Sometimes, guilt is a reminder that you're not doing what you think is
right, and those reminders can be valuable.
But most of the guilt-motivated people I know don't match that pattern. Many of them
are dedicating their lives to making the world a better place, and they can do far more
good by focusing their attention on their work and their health than they can by
worrying over one beggar in the street, or over a thousand starving families that they
can do nothing to save. They berate themselves for not needing less rest, for not
being able to do the psychologically impossible, for not being as smart or as
productive or as wealthy or as kind as those around them.
I say: Yes, the beggar suﬀers. Yes, a thousand families starve. The world is hurting.
And yes, there are others who are doing more than you to help. Some are smarter,
some are more productive, some were born wealthier, some are kinder, some are less
psychologically fragile, some have a stronger will.
But none of these are reasons for guilt. Guilt was made for us, not us for it. Guilt is
useful only insofar as it helps you wrest yourself from the wrong path. If you're already
walking the path you want to walk, if you're working on becoming kinder, or more
generous, or psychologically stronger, or wealthier, or smarter, if you're already
moving as fast as you can given your current constraints, then the fact that the world
is still hurting and you aren't strong enough to ﬁx things yet is no reason for guilt.
Rather, it's a reason for anger, at a world where nobody is evil but everything is
broken. It's a reason for resolve, to push yourself as hard as is healthy and sustainable
but no harder.
But it is not a reason for guilt, once you are doing what you can, in full light of the fact
that you are still only mortal.
There are dozens of opportunities to transmute guilt, or awkwardness, or not-my-
problem into resolve, each day.
Notice the disabused middle-aged woman who has to sacriﬁce a part of her soul
working a job at Starbucks in order to earn her right to survive. See the madman
yelling across the street, while everyone else reﬂexively struggles to ignore or unsee
him. See a morbidly obese person avoid the stares of onlookers as they struggle with

self-loathing in a civilization that ﬁlled its cheapest foods with poisons that ravage
bodies.
Some people ignore these painful parts of the world. Others try to unsee them. Others
try to distance themselves, by poking fun at those who are deemed "pathetic."
I suggest seeing them, and remembering. Remember that there may come a time
when humanity will move the very stars to ensure that no mind suﬀers as much as a
ﬁrst-world beggar does today. Remember that, beneath all the mental callouses that
allow you to write fellow human beings oﬀ as unsalvageable, the reason you won't
help them is not because they aren't worth helping, but because there are too many
other things that need doing ﬁrst.
So notice your impulse towards guilt. Notice your impulse to ignore. Notice your
impulse to distance yourself from people you don't want to acknowledge. Notice your
impulse to assure yourself that it's not your fault, that there's nothing you can do, that
you can't help them because it's cheaper to help other people suﬀering just as much
abroad.
Then stop following those impulses. See the dark world. Acknowledge the pain, and
remind yourself that we live in a universe worth changing.
Remind yourself that you're a part of the grand human story, and that when our
children's children's children hear about the amount of suﬀering we had to pass over
in combat of greater evils, they will shed tears.
The count of people we have to leave behind can be a persistent source of pain. But
don't let it be a persistent source of guilt. Instead, let it be a reminder that the
universe is vast and uncaring, and that our job here is unﬁnished.

The best you can
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/best-you-can/
In ﬁction, protagonists narrow their focus until the diﬀerence between success and
failure on their speciﬁc task seems like the diﬀerence between victory and defeat.
Batman attempts to solve the mystery while ensuring that nobody dies; meanwhile,
children in Africa suﬀer from Malaria. The crew in The Martian spends billions of dollars
worth of capital to save one man; capital that could have been spent curing diseases.
Real people run a risk of duplicating this error, if they try to ﬁnd the very best action
available.
It's easy to paralyze yourself if you try to do the "right thing." There's always more
uncertainty to be had. There's always more information you could gather. It's hard to
become conﬁdent that you're doing the right thing. This can lead to paralysis, and
persistent inaction.
It's much easier, I think, to stop asking "is this action the right action to take?" and
instead ask "what's the best action I can identify at the moment?"
Sometimes, the best action you can identify is "search for more alternatives."
Sometimes, it's "study more" or "learn more." Sometimes, it's a speciﬁc action. The
nice thing is that "what's the best action I can ﬁnd in the next ﬁve minutes?" always
has a concrete answer. If you search for that, instead, you won't get paralyzed.
Spoiler alert: you can't ﬁnd the "actually best" action. Insofar as there is an "actually
best" sequence of motor outputs your brain could produce, it's a mad convoluted
dance that leverages butterﬂy eﬀects to reforge the world overnight. You're not going
to ﬁnd the "best action." And the best action you can ﬁnd is exactly what it sounds like
— the best action you're able to ﬁnd.
You never have enough information to make a fully informed choice. You never have
enough time to consider all the possibilities, or weigh all the evidence. You are always
biased; your brain is compromised. The problem before you is too hard, and no matter
what you do, a billion more people are going to die.
No matter what gambles you take, no matter how risky or cautious you are, you're
trading oﬀ some possible futures against other ones. You can't save them all.
All you can do is look at your actions, and take the best one you can ﬁnd.
It's easy for humans to zoom in to the game we think we're playing, and try to win
completely, to solve the mystery without letting anyone die.
It's easier to remember to pick the best action you can ﬁnd, rather than striving to do
the "right thing," if you remember that people have already died; that the threshold
has already been crossed. That we're not playing for a "total victory" any more, that
we've already missed our chance at a "perfect score."

This is a battle we've already lost.
A hundred billion people have already died.
Rome fell. The barbarian hordes ﬂooded through its gates. There were a thousand
years of darkness.
We've already missed our shot at a total victory. Now we're just building the best
future we can.
So don't get paralyzed looking for the right thing to do. Just ﬁnd the best action you
can ﬁnd, and do that.

Dark, not colorless
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/dark-not-colorless/
The last arc of posts has been about how to handle a dour universe. Become unable to
despair, learn to see the darkness rather than ﬂinching from it, learn to choose
between bad and worse without suﬀering. Learn to live in a grim world without
becoming grim yourself, learn to hear bad news without suﬀering, and stop needing to
know your actions were acceptable. Come to terms with the fact you may lose, use
the darkness as a source of fuel, and let go of dreams of total victory. These are the
tools I use to tap into intrinsic motivation, in a precarious world where the problems
are larger than I am.
Where others see a hurting world and feel guilty for not doing enough to help it, I see
a hurting world and feed my own resolve. Instead of feeling guilty for not working until
I drop, I recognize the psychological impossibility and resolve to do everything I can
within my mortal constraints. For me, at least, this internal drive is more robust and
reliable than guilt motivation.
This brings us to the end of the penultimate arc of the "replacing guilt" series of posts,
which I began many months ago, and takes us into the ﬁnal arc. The ﬁrst arc was
about addressing the listless guilt that comes from ignoring a part of yourself that
wants to be doing something more. The second arc was about eliminating the feeling
of obligation, and ﬁghting for something you care about only because you care about
it. The third arc was about coming to terms with your limitations and learning to
optimize within them, rather than feeling guilty because of them. This post concludes
the fourth arc, about living in a dark universe and tapping into resolve instead of guilt.
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal arc is about what you do next. Once you've removed guilt and
replaced it with intrinsic drive — both cold resolve and hot desire to make the future
bright — what do you do next? What thought patterns allow one to turn these feelings
into actions, rather than feelings of frustration and impotence?
I'll explore some of my answers to those questions in the coming handful of posts. But
before then, I have one reminder I'd like to pass along.
Among all this talk of coming to terms with a dark and dour world, I ask you to
remember that the world is dark, but it is not colorless.
I have seen many a friend attempt to see the dark world and then despair (for they
are too small and the problems too large), and then confuse their sense of
hopelessness with a sense of meaninglessness.
(The reasoning goes: "If the universe is so large, how can I matter? If the world is in
such deep trouble, how can I make a diﬀerence? If all this were true, nothing would
matter.")
So consider this a gentle reminder that a dark world is not a lost world. It is not a grey
world, where everything is dead and there is nothing we can do. It is not a cold empty
universe, from which nothing can be built. It is simply a damaged world, a hurting
world, that is intolerable precisely because it could be so much better.

If you gazed upon a worthless universe, all cold and dead, the sight would likely not ﬁll
you with despair — because while there is no light, while there are no happy sapients
living full lives, there is also no darkness: that universe is empty and dull. If you gaze
upon our universe and despair, then, then that can only be because there is so much
that is not right, but could be.
While our world is dark, it is still ﬁlled with color, and indeed many spots of light and
even brilliance. Children laugh. Lovers meet. Right now, someone is just
understanding one of the deep secrets of how the universe works for the ﬁrst time,
and their mind is ﬁlling with awe. Right now, someone is building a close friendship for
the ﬁrst time in a decade. Every day bears witness to a billion acts of love and
kindness. This world is dark, yes — 150,000 people die every day — but it is not lost.
So don't let despair or hopelessness weigh you down. Instead, let them be a reminder:
those are feelings you can only get from something worth saving. There are things
here that are worth ﬁghting for. If you begin to despair, then let that feeling be a
reminder of what could be, and let everything that this world isn't be your fuel.
The world may be dark, but it's not colorless.

Stop trying to try and try
Imagine a graduate student of mathematics as they interact with a professor,
attempting to understand something in the professor's area of expertise. They're
working hard to wrap their head around the basic formalism. They're in "learning
mode" — they're a student in the presence of a master, expected to try to understand
the math but not necessarily expected to succeed. Even if they're doing quite well,
they're still reminded of how math is big and they are small; they encounter wide
swaths of knowledge that they do not yet have, and often feel humbled. They use
their tools tentatively, aware that they may be using them inappropriately, and
wonder when they'll become a master.
Now imagine the same student tutoring an undergraduate in linear algebra, a topic
they know quite well. Now they're in "teaching mode." Math is still large; the graduate
student is still small; but the context is very diﬀerent. The focus is no longer drawn
repeatedly to all the things they don't know yet — but it's not drawn to all the things
they do know, either. The focus simply isn't on them, or their abilities. It's on the
undergrad. The grad student, in the back of their mind is not thinking "wow math is so
large I don't know enough yet I'm not sure I'll ever know enough", and they're also not
thinking "wow I know so much this is great!" — they're thinking about how to help the
undergrad understand a complex concept.
I think that many people who are in learning mode expect that mastery feels like
learning mode, except that instead of feeling like they know very little, they feel like
they know quite a bit. By contrast, I think mastery looks much more like teaching
mode — it looks like someone operating in a context where their knowledge and their
skills are not the focus, but are just unconscious assumptions in the background.
Consider the grad student in teaching mode. Their approach to answering questions in
teaching mode is very diﬀerent than their approach in learning mode. That's not
because all the questions they encounter in teaching-mode are simple — if you've
ever been a tutor you know that tutors are commonly asked questions they can't
answer in the moment. Rather, they approach questions diﬀerently because context is
diﬀerent. When the professor asks them questions, they're Expected To Do Their Best;
when the undergrad asks them questions, they're just expected to answer.
In the ﬁrst case, they're expected to try; in the second case, they're assumed capable,
an assumption that fades into the background.
I describe this model because I think there is an analog of these two modes when it
comes to "trying" to achieve any task — and today, I'm going to talk about trying.
My advice is simple: notice when you're expected to try, and consider reframing. It's
much harder to solve a problem when you're Expected To Do Your Best than it is to
solve a problem when you're immersed in various subtasks, with the assumption that
you're going to solve the problem buried implicitly and unconsciously in the context.
For example, consider exercise. Many people ﬁnd it much easier to exercise in a
context where the exercise is in the background rather than the foreground. Imagine
someone who plays recreational soccer, sprinting up and down the soccer ﬁeld up till
the brink of exhaustion. Now imagine them not playing soccer, but just trying to sprint

up and down the ﬁeld up to the brink of exhaustion. They probably push themselves a
lot less in the latter case. If "sprint up and down the ﬁeld a lot" is the main goal, then
at each possible stopping point, part of them starts trying to convince the rest that
they've exercised enough for the day, and they must spend willpower to continue. In a
soccer match, by contrast, the focus is elsewhere. They aren't constantly pinging
themselves with explanations of how they've done enough sprinting for today. They
aren't generating reasons why it's OK to stop here. They're trying to score a goal.
Getting exercise is a background assumption, not a conscious choice.
Switching contexts such that your actual goal is in the background rather than the
foreground — such that pursuing it is not a conscious choice that you need to reaﬃrm
every time you ﬁnd a stopping point — is a powerful tool.
This is not novel advice, of course, but it is perhaps a generalization over a few
diﬀerent common types of advice. As another example, consider two people trying to
become friends on purpose (perhaps for romantic reasons). I conjecture that it's much
harder for people to become friends on purpose than to become friends accidentally
while pursuing some other endeavor.
If they're trying to become friends on purpose, then they're constantly asking
themselves, "are we friends yet?", and like the grad student asking themselves "do I
understand all of mathematics yet?", the answer will never be an unresounding "yes".
They would do better to switch to a context where they're not constantly checking
whether they're friends yet, and are instead just being friends.
This model suggests that it's much more eﬀective to alter the context such that
neither party is regularly checking the depth of the friendship, but such that a
strengthening bond is the implicit background assumption. (This suggests one reason
why online dating feels more socially awkward than going on a date with someone you
met in some other context.)
For a third (somewhat silly) example, imagine that I woke up one morning and said "I'll
try to run MIRI well today." (MIRI, the Machine Intelligence Research Institute, is an
organization I run.) If I did this, I'd be in trouble. How does one run a research
institute? What would my next actions be? Things that seem plausibly like what
people-who-run-institutes-well would do? Things that seem defensible to the board of
directors? I have no idea how to "try to run MIRI."
Now imagine instead that I woke up and said "I'm going to glance at my MIRI priority
list, update it if today happens to be Monday, and then identify MIRI's biggest
bottleneck and work on it directly." Now I'm in business, and might do something
useful with my day.
Notice the diﬀerence. In the second case, I'm not asking myself whether I can run a
research institute. I'm not asking myself how to run a research institute (though
"study the strategies of people who ran other successful institutes" does occasionally
get to the top of my priority list). I'm assuming myself capable — not consciously, but
as a background assumption. I'm not assuming success — either I can run a research
institute or I can't, the jury's still out on that one — but my capability is not the focus
of my attention. I fret about much more practical things, like the tone to strike in a
fundraiser announcement post, or how to prioritize paper-writing versus novel
research. I'm never "trying to run MIRI;" I'm just working on the next top-priority task.
This, I think, is one of the main distinctions between "trying to try" and "actually
trying".

Trying to try to run MIRI would feel like just trying to run MIRI — it would feel like
thinking about what it takes to run an institute and reading books about running
institutes and worrying whether the board of directors thought I was doing a good job
and so on. From the inside, I'd probably think I was trying very hard to actually run an
institute.
Actually trying to run MIRI feels very diﬀerent from the inside. It doesn't feel like trying
to make an institute run, it feels like trying to get all the most important emails
handled while not letting administrative duties suck up my day. It feels like struggling
to prioritize three important tasks that can't all be done. Actually trying to run MIRI
does not feel like trying to run MIRI, it feels like a never-ending stream of smaller
tasks.
I think many people imagine the diﬀerence between trying to try and actually trying
involves something like Additional Eﬀort or Additional Willpower. It's easy to imagine
someone trying to try to (say) cure aging. Maybe they ﬂounder around a bit and talk
about how they want to join a biology startup, or start a biology startup, or get a
biology degree, all while really deeply wanting to ﬁnd some way to cure aging. It's also
easy to imagine that the person "actually trying" to cure aging is doing something
similar, but with more determination and a bit of pixie dust that makes things work
out. The actually-tryer does the same things, but for them, the startup works through
dint of sheer willpower; or they get a biology degree while winning so many accolades
that they get to set up their own laboratory.
This isn't how I imagine "actually trying." It's not trying-to-try with extra gusto.
Actually trying looks like solving small subproblems, with the more ambitious target
no longer the focus of attention, but rather a background task. Actually trying to cure
aging doesn't look like a person getting a biology degree with especially grim
determination, it looks like Aubrey de Grey wading through a mountain of mundane
tasks while scraping together enough money to keep SENS running.
(SENS is currently fundraising, by the way.)
If you want to solve hard problems, stop trying to solve the hard problem directly.
Change the context such that that's a background assumption: all your actions are
going to be pointed roughly in the direction of solving-the-problem; what next? What's
the next thing that needs doing? Work on that.
This is perhaps simple advice, but I myself have found it useful in the past. Many
years ago, when I was in high school, a friend of mine came back from college having
joined a fencing team. He wanted to show me some of the basics, so he tossed me a
sabre, and we had at each other. We crossed swords a few times, and he said
something along the lines of "Nate, the goal isn't to hit my sword, the goal is to hit
me."
It's an obvious thought, a simple thought, and a thought I had failed to think. After
that, I wasn't trying to fence, I was trying to hit him.
Or consider the scene in The Matrix where Morpheus tells Neo "Come on, stop trying
to hit me and hit me!" — at which point Neo's blows grow more intense, until he gets
a ﬁst past Morpheus' defenses. I suspect that many people watching that scene
imagine Neo turning on the "try harder," pouring more eﬀort into his punches and
harnessing his frustration. When I watch the scene, I imagine a little bit of that, but

mostly I imagine a similar mental shift to my "don't bang swords together; strike the
enemy" mental shift — I imagine Neo had mostly been throwing out a bunch of martial
arts moves that had recently been uploaded into his brain, in attempts to see if any of
them worked against Morpheus, and that when Morpheus said "stop trying to hit me
and hit me" Neo thought "oh yeah, I'm not supposed to be deploying martial arts
moves and monitoring whether I'm ﬁghting well enough, I'm supposed to be hitting
Morpheus," and that his brain shifted from the "expected to try" gear to the
"competence assumed" gear.
I think many people solve problems more eﬀectively in the "competence assumed"
gear," when they're not fretting about whether they can solve problems because
they're too busy fretting about very speciﬁc actionable subproblems.
So if you want to tackle big problems, my advice is this: If you ever ﬁnd yourself
saying "I'm currently trying to solve [problem]", be wary. This is doubly true if you're
Expected To Do Your Best.
If you ﬁnd yourself saying "well I'm trying to solve aging, but it's a big problem, so I'll
likely fail," then stop in your tracks. Not because of the underconﬁdence — aging is a
big problem and you will likely fail to solve it — but because you're sprinting up and
down the ﬁeld when you'd be better oﬀ playing a game of soccer.
If you approach a big problem with Intent To Try, then at every plausible stopping
point part of you will be trying to convince you that you've done enough. And thus, at
every plausible stopping point, you'll need to spend willpower to continue. Find a
soccer game instead — some way to focus your attention on useful object-level tasks,
with the pursuit of the important goal turned into an implicit unconscious background
assumption so deeply ingrained in your plan that you can hardly see it any more.
As for how you make or ﬁnd the soccer games, that's a discussion for another day. For
now, my generic suggestion is to (a) generalize from the above examples and (b)
imagine someone who's "playing soccer" with respect to your task or problem, and
ask yourself what they might be doing. The key is to make the pursuit of your goal
implicit, and spend your focus on the subproblems.

There is no try
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/there-is-no-try/
Ok, so "try" is actually a pretty useful concept; there's a reason we have a very short word
for it in the English language. Nevertheless, I have found it quite useful to occasionally spend
a few weeks refusing to use the word "try" or any of its synonyms, at least when talking
about myself, and especially when thinking about myself to myself.
This is a quick and easy way to put success in the background, as discussed last week. For
example, compare these two responses to "what are you doing?"
I'm trying to solve this math problem.
versus
I'm pursuing a promising line of inquiry on this math problem. If it doesn't lead
anywhere, I have two others to pursue next. If all three are fruitless, I'll ask for help.
For the ﬁrst person, "failure" is either ﬁrst or second on the list of things they expect to
happen next: they're trying to solve the problem, and either they'll solve it, or they'll fail. If
they fail, they can say "well, I tried", and move on. And because failing and moving on is
such a prominent option, they must struggle against it each time they pause; they are like
the person trying to sprint up and down a soccer ﬁeld as much as they can, rather than the
person playing soccer.
The second person, who does not have 'try' in their vocabulary, is forced to say what speciﬁc
actions they are actually taking — and now, failure on the entire problem is much further
down on the list of possible outcomes. Failure at this particular line of approach just drops
them into the next line of approach. They're more like the person playing the soccer game,
getting exercise ("trying to solve the problem") without that idea explicit in their mind. This
sort of mindset, I ﬁnd, is often helpful.
Imagine that I'm in the middle of ﬂossing my teeth, when someone knocks on the door and
asks what I'm doing. I wouldn't answer "trying to ﬂoss," I'd just answer "ﬂossing" — unless I
had been interrupted so many times that I was beginning to doubt my ability to complete the
task. When we're sure of our ability to complete a task, we don't describe ourselves as

"trying", we just do it. I don't get up every morning and try to dress myself, I just get up and
dress myself.
Whenever you can honestly say that you are doing, rather than trying, then I suggest you do
so — but often this is only honestly possible when you're quite conﬁdent in your own ability
to succeed.
(Some self-help books and professionals advocate always saying that you are "doing" rather
than "trying," but this often seems dishonest to me: when I'm trying to win a race, and I'm
currently in tenth place, and you ask me what I'm doing, I have a hard time saying "winning
a race" with a straight face.)
When removing 'try' and its synonyms from your vocabulary, you may ﬁnd that you can't
honestly say you're "solving a math problem," because you have no idea whether you'll
succeed. And saying you're "working on a math problem" is only slightly better; it's mostly
just using "working" as a synonym for "trying."
In these cases, if you want to remove the word 'try', I suggest not ﬁnding a near synonym,
but increasing the granularity of your descriptions. Don't say "I'm trying to solve this math
problem," say "I'm transforming the problem into a programming problem so I can see it
from a diﬀerent angle", or "I'm gameifying the problem so that my intuitions can get a better
handle on it," or "I'm producing random algebraic manipulations of this equation in
desperate hope that one of them happens to be the answer," or "I'm staring at the problem
waiting for my gut to say something for enough time to pass that I can give up without losing
face." Describe what you're doing on the level of granularity where at each step you
describe, it would be silly to say you were "trying" at that step, in the same way it would be
silly to say that you wake up and try to dress yourself — describe your actions on a level of
granularity where each step is deﬁnitely something you're doing, rather than trying.
Often, when I get down to the level of granularity where I'm doing rather than trying, I ﬁnd
that I'm doing something pretty silly — as in, I'll start out by saying "I'm trying to write the
opening paragraph of this paper", and then I'll notice the word 'trying', and I'll introspect a
bit and rephrase a bit and I'll eventually ﬁgure out that I was doing was "sitting in front of a
screen holding the subject of the paper in my head waiting for my gut to ﬁgure out what to
write" or something along those lines. With that description given, it's much easier for me to
say "aha, my gut doesn't know what to write ﬁrst; I'll make an outline on a whiteboard or
some other place that feels non-committal."
"Try" is a useful word, but saying that you're "trying" to do something is a high level
description, and it can often hide some very silly behaviors, like "sitting around staring at the
problem waiting for enough time to pass that I can give up without losing face."
Occasionally, I tell people who come to me for advice that "try" is a ﬁne and useful word, but
saying that you're trying is something that other people get to say about you, not a thing
that you get to say about yourself. Others get to say "they're trying to save that person's
life," but you only get to say "I'm performing chest compressions while thinking back to
remember my CPR training."
This isn't always the most useful advice; there is, after all, a reason why 'try' is such a short
word. There are many situations where it's quite useful to communicate something like "I'm
trying to prove this lemma; can you help?", and there are many other cases where it can be
useful to use the word 'try' even when thinking about yourself to yourself. Nevertheless,
there is a helpful sentiment buried in the above advice, and I have often found it useful to
cash out my "try"s.
As such, I recommend, as an exercise, spending a few weeks refusing to use the word 'try'.
This can help you train yourself to notice the diﬀerence between "trying" as in taking

intelligent, concrete, fruitful actions; versus "trying" as in waiting for enough time to pass
that you can safely say "well I tried."
This probably isn't what Yoda actually meant by "there is no try." Nevertheless, I like to
imagine Luke nodding and saying "Oh, right; there is no try. I will close my eyes, relax, let the
force ﬂow through me, focus my mind, concentrate on a mental image of my X-wing, and
then will it to lift, with no regard for its actual mass." That's the level of granularity at which
you can tell whether a cashed-out "try" is a pre-emptive excuse for failure or an intelligent
attempt to succeed.

Obvious advice
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/obvious-advice/
This is a common scene at the MIRI oﬃces: I have a decision to make, like what sort of
winter fundraiser to run. Before making any choices, I take a few minutes to write
down all the obvious things to do before making the decision: spend ﬁve minutes
brainstorming options before weighting any pros or cons; talk to people who have run
diﬀerent types of fundraisers in similar situations; and so on. I can usually generate a
handful of obvious things to do before making my decision. I write those things down,
and then I describe my decision to one of my advisors and see if they have any
advice. They say "only the obvious," and then rattle oﬀ ﬁve more obvious things I
hadn't thought of, all of them useful.
Sometimes, I wonder how successful a person would be if they just did all the obvious
things in pursuit of their goals.
So with that in mind, allow me to oﬀer some quite obvious pieces of advice, which
have proven very useful for me:
Before carrying out any plan, actually do the obvious things.
When you're about to make a big decision, pause, and ask yourself what obvious
things a reasonable person would do before making this sort of decision. Would they
spend a full ﬁve minutes (by the clock) brainstorming alternative options before
settling on a decision? Would they consult with friends and advisors? Would they do
some particular type of research?
Then, actually do the obvious things.
A corollary to this advice is to also occasionally consider not doing things the wrong
way. Imagine someone who's recently failed at an endeavor that was important to
them. They're fraught with despair, and you attempt to console them by saying "well,
at least you learned something." They snap back, "yeah, I learned never to try hard
things ever again!"
This may be just an emotional outburst, yes, but if they act upon this outburst — and
withdraw, and become less curious, and become more bitter — then they are in solid
need of the above corollary. In fact, the middle of an emotional outburst is one of the
best times to use the corollary. I have often myself found it useful, mid-hasty-decision,
to pause, reﬂect, and ask myself "wait... is this a terrible plan?"
(And then, if the answer is yes, I don't carry out the plan — a crucial step.)
Both pieces of advice above — "do the obvious preparation", and "don't execute bad
plans" — each get a lot more useful as you expand your notions of "obvious
preparation" and "bad plan". In fact, quite a bit of rationalist-style advice is about
expanding your notion of "obvious thing" and "bad plan." Thus, this advice gets much
more helpful if you make sure to do the obvious things.
(Not all the rationalist advice is of this form, of course; many of the most important
rationalist skills are cognitive operations that happen in ﬁve seconds or less. One

example of a ﬁve-second-level skill is the skill of encountering a new problem and
reﬂexively starting to list obvious perparations or noticing an emotional outburst and
reﬂexively taking a step back and checking whether your current plan is terrible. More
often than not, one of the goals of these blog posts is to install a ﬁve-second cognitive
reﬂex of deciding to apply a tool by describing the tool itself. But I digress.)
For example, the cognitive reﬂex of "enumerate obvious preparations" becomes much
more useful once you have concepts like "brainstorm options before weighing pros
and cons" and "set a ﬁve minute timer and actually think about the problem for the
whole ﬁve minutes" and "consider the opportunity costs." And the cognitive reﬂex of
"check whether your current plan is terrible" becomes more useful as you add
concepts like "rationalizing" and "blindly acting out a social role" and so on.
So this week's advice is obvious advice, but useful nonetheless: ﬁnd a way to gain a
reﬂex to actually do all the obvious preparation, before undertaking a new task or
making a big decision.
It's surprising how often the advice that I give people who come to me asking for
advice cashes out to some form of "well, have you considered doing the obvious
thing?"
For example, when someone comes to me and says "help, I have a talk I have to give
and I'm going to be terribly nervous and I dread it, what do I do?" it's often
surprisingly helpful for me to ask, "well, what sort of things would make you less
nervous?" Or someone comes to me and says "I ﬁnd myself just playing video games
all day, how do I stop myself?", I ﬁrst ask, "have you considered what sorts of things
you'd rather do besides play video games all day?"
In many cases, the obvious prompts aren't suﬃcient. But in a surprising number of
cases, they are. I still often ﬁnd this advice useful myself: when my attention slips, I
am often helped by someone just asking me to consider the obvious — "what would
make the task less dreadful?" or "have you thought for ﬁve minutes about
alternatives?" or "have you considered delegating this?" and so on.
Much of my advice for how to manage guilt was generated by this very process, by
me imagining feeling guilty, and then imagining which obvious things I'd try to do to
engage with the feeling. I would ask myself questions like "what is the cause of this
feeling?" and "how is it being useful to me?" and "is there a better way I can achieve
those goals?" and I would spend time listening to myself and brainstorming options,
because those are all the obvious ways to address the problem. Many of my early
posts on guilt were a product of articulating that reﬂexive process. The types of
obvious advice that I would generate — such as asking "what is the cause and use of
this feeling?" — might be very diﬀerent from the obvious advice that you would
generate, and that's ﬁne. The trick is to apply the obvious advice ﬁrst.
Or imagine you have the problem of ﬁnding it diﬃcult to use the "do the obvious"
technique. Maybe you've been struggling to remember to consider the obvious
whenever you encounter a hard decision. Instead of asking for advice, consider
generating a list like the following, ﬁrst:
Spend ﬁve minutes generating examples of decisions you made in the past
where it would have been helpful to do the obvious things ﬁrst. Then spend ﬁve
minutes examining those and looking for patterns.

Close your eyes and visualize yourself facing a new decision in as much concrete
detail as you can, and practice thinking "oh wait, let me list the obvious things
before proceeding."
Train yourself to notice decision-points better by buying a tally counter and
tracking decisions and giving yourself positive reinforcement every time you do.
Or imagine that you have tried to do all the obvious things, and you ﬁnd that you're
going into "enumerate the obvious" mode even for the most trivial tasks, and it's
making your trivial tasks take way too long and the whole thing seems pretty foolish.
Then, before complaining, consider trying the corollary, and consider whether
applying "try the obvious" far too often is in fact a terrible plan.
Your list of obvious things will very likely look very diﬀerent from my own — my friends
and advisors still generate obvious-in-retrospect ideas that I myself was incapable of
generating, even after spending a few minutes generating the sort of ideas I expected
them to generate. Collecting tips and techniques from other people in your
environment is a great way to expand your "obvious things" repertoire, and asking for
advice from friends will likely continue to generate new obvious things for quite some
time. It's OK for your lists to be very diﬀerent; the trick is to do some of the obvious
preparation before making a hard decision. It can often make a diﬀerence.
The important thing, here, is to ﬁnd a way to actually start doing the obvious things.
This is the skill that's like footwork for a rationalist: remembering to actually do the
obvious preparation is easy to learn and diﬃcult to master; it's a skill to drill when you
have spare mental energy in hopes that it comes naturally and easily whenever the
going gets tough and the stakes get high.
I continue to wonder how powerful a person could become, if they simply managed to
do all the obvious things in pursuit of their goals.

The art of response
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/the-art-of-response/
Imagine two diﬀerent software engineers in job interviews. Both are asked for an
algorithm that solves some programming puzzle, such as "identify all palindromes in a
string of characters."
The ﬁrst candidate, Alice, reﬂexively enters problem-solving mode upon hearing the
problem. She pauses for a few seconds as she internalizes the problem, and then
quickly thinks up a very ineﬃcient algorithm that ﬁnds the answer by brute force. She
decides to sketch this algorithm ﬁrst (as a warm up) and then turn her mind to ﬁnding
a more eﬃcient path to the answer.
The second candidate, Bob, responds very diﬀerently to the same problem. He
reﬂexively predicts that he won't be able to solve the problem. He struggles to quiet
that voice in his head while he waits for a solution to present itself, but no solution is
forthcoming. He struggles to focus as the seconds pass, until a part of his brain points
out that he's been quiet for an uncomfortably long time, and the interviewer probably
already thinks he's stupid. From then on, his thoughts are stuck on the situation,
despite his attempts to wrest them back to the task at hand.
Part of what makes the diﬀerence between Alice and Bob might be skill: Alice might
have more experience that lets her solve programming puzzles with less concerted
eﬀort, which helps her get to a solution before self-doubt creeps in. Self-conﬁdence
may also be a factor: perhaps Alice is simply less prone to self-doubt, and therefore
less prone to this type of self-sabotage.
A third diﬀerence between Alice and Bob is their response pattern. Bob begins by
waiting blankly for a solution to present itself; Alice begins by checking whether she
can solve a simple version of the problem ("can I solve it by brute force?"). Bob is
more liable to panic when no answer comes ("I have been quiet for too long"), Alice is
more liable to break the problem down further if no solution presents itself ("Can I
divide and conquer?").
This diﬀerence is also explained in part by experience: a more seasoned software
engineer is more likely to reﬂexively notice that a problem can be solved with a simple
recursion, and know which data structures to apply where. I don't think it's only
experience, though. Imagine Alice and Bob both faced with a second problem, outside
their usual comfort zone — say, a friend asks them for advice about how to handle a
major life-changing event. It's easy to imagine Alice attempting to understand the
situation better and asking clarifying questions that help her understand how her
friend is thinking about the question. It's similarly easy to imagine Bob feeling
profoundly uncomfortable, while he tries to give neutral advice and worries about the
fact that he might give bad advice that ruins his friend's life.
One might call what Alice is doing "conﬁdence," but that doesn't tell us how it's
working. And 'conﬁdence' also comes with connotations that may not apply to Alice —
she may well decide that she isn't in a position to give good advice, she may be
working from a shaky understanding and thus doubt her own conclusions, even as she
turns her thoughts to understanding the obstacle before her.

One of the big diﬀerences, as I see it, is the diﬀerence in the response pattern
between Alice and Bob. Alice justs gets down to addressing the obstacle before her,
Bob spends mental cycles ﬂoundering. Managing response patterns is something of an
art: when confronted with an obstacle, does your brain switch into problem-solving
gear or do you start to ﬂail?
Note that the art of response is not about immediately solving any problem placed
before you. Sometimes, the best automatic response is to ﬁnd some way to disengage
or dodge. You aren't obligated to solve every problem placed before you. The goal of
having appropriate response patterns is to avoid ﬂailing and avoid staring blankly. The
goal is to have your mind shift into the problem-solving gear.
Having eﬀective responses prepared isn't necessarily a general skill. I'm a computer
programmer at heart, and a few years ago I switched paths to math research. If I'm
faced with a programming problem that I want to solve, I quickly and easily slip into
eﬀective-response-mode; I can often ﬁnd solutions to problems reﬂexively, and when I
can't, I reﬂexively examine the problem from many diﬀerent viewpoints and start
breaking it down. Yet, if you confront me with a math problem I want solved, there are
still times when my reﬂexive response is to sit back and wait for someone else to
solve it for me. (It doesn't help that I'm surrounded by brilliant mathematicians who
can do so successfully.) That reﬂexive response — the one of blanking my mind,
curious while I wait for someone else to ﬁnd the answer — is not a very eﬀective
response.
Eﬀective responses aren't about answering quickly, either. When paired with expertise
and familiarity an eﬀective response to an obstacle will often lead to a fast answer,
but oftentimes the most eﬀective response is to pause and think. Plenty of people
have very ineﬀective response patterns that involve opening their mouths the
moment you ask them to help you confront an obstacle. Some people reﬂexively start
solving the wrong problem, others reﬂexively start making excuses for themselves,
still others reﬂexively share personal anecdotes that paint them in a positive light.
Eﬀective response patterns are not about answering fast, they're about answering
well.
The most competent people that I know are, almost universally, people who have very
eﬀective response patterns to obstacles in their areas of expertise. The good
programmers I meet reﬂexively start breaking a problem down the moment they
decide to solve it. The stellar mathematicians I know reﬂexively start prodding at
problems with various techniques, or reﬂexively identify parts of the problem that they
don't yet understand. The best businesspeople among my advisors are people who
listen to me describe the choice before me, and reﬂexively describe the costs,
constraints, and opportunities they observe. Each has acquired a highly eﬀective
response pattern to problems that fall within their area of expertise. This response
pattern allows them to hit an obstacle and start taking it apart, with an Alice-like
mindset, rather than ﬂailing and doubting themselves as per Bob.
Conﬁdence, practice, and talent all help develop these speciﬁc response patterns
quite a bit. That said, you can often learn someone's response patterns with much less
eﬀort than it takes to learn their skills: you can start thinking in terms of incentives,
opportunity costs, and markets long before you become a master economist (though
reading a microeconomics textbook surely doesn't hurt). Competence isn't just about
believing in your capabilities; it's also about having a pattern prepared that takes you

directly to the "break down the problem and gnaw on the parts" stage without ever
dumping you into the "worry about how you've been silent for a long time and reﬂect
on the fact that the interviewer probably thinks you're dumb" zone.
Having an explicit pattern, such as a checklist, can help you switch from one pattern
to the other. For example, imagine Bob in the example above had a checklist which
read as follows:
If I start dwelling on how likely I am to fail, I will do the following. (1) Say "hmm,
let me think for a few minutes" aloud. (2) Verify that I understand the problem,
and ask clarifying questions if I don't. (3) Check whether I could easily solve the
problem by brute force. (3) Come up with a few simpliﬁcations of the problem. (4)
Find a way to break oﬀ only one part of the problem or one of its simpliﬁed
variants.
then he may well be able to manually switch from a ﬂailing response pattern to an
eﬀective one. This sort of manual switching is a good way to instill a new response
pattern. The ultimate goal, though, is for eﬃcient response patterns to become
reﬂexive.
In fact, I think many people could beneﬁt from developing eﬃcient "fallback" response
patterns, to handle new or surprising situations. Response patterns like "verify that
your observations were correct" or "ﬁnd more data" or "generate more than one
plausible explanation for the surprise" and so on. As far as I can tell, there is a general
skill of being able to smoothly handle surprising new situations and think on your feet,
and I suspect this can be attained by developing good response patterns designed for
surprising new situations.
This advice is not new, of course. Lots of self-help advice will tell you to break down
the problems before you into smaller parts, and to infuse your actions with
intentionality, and to reﬂexively do the obvious things, and so on. So I won't say much
more on how to attain the Alice-like mindstate as opposed to the Bob-like mindstate.
The important takeaway is that sometimes people respond to obstacles by breaking
them down and other times they respond by ﬂailing, and one way or another, it's
useful to develop reﬂexive responses that put you into the former mindstate.
The way that I do it is by monitoring the ways that I respond to new obstacles placed
before me. I watch myself facing various situations and observe which ones lead be to
reﬂexively get defensive, or to reﬂexively blank my mind and wait for someone else to
answer, or to reﬂexively freeze in shock and act dumbfounded. Then I practice
building better response patterns for those situations, by ﬁguring out what the
checklists to run are, and I do my best to replace those patterns with reﬂexive inquiry,
curiosity, requests for clariﬁcation, and impulses to take initiative. Polished response
patterns have proven useful to me, and I attribute much of my skill at math,
programming, and running nonproﬁts to having sane responses to new obstacles.
Regardless of where you get your response patterns from, I suspect that honing them
will do you well.

Conﬁdence all the way up
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/conﬁdence-all-the-way-up/
I apparently possess some sort of aura of competence. Some say I'm conﬁdent, others
say I'm arrogant, others remark on how I seem very certain of myself (which I have
been told both as compliment and critique).
I was surprised, at ﬁrst, by these remarks from friends and family — from my
perspective, I'm usually the ﬁrst person in the conversation to express uncertainty in
the form of probability estimates and error bars. I'm often quick to brainstorm
alternative explanations of the data I use to support my claims. And, of course, I'm
certain of nothing.
In fact, I had a conversation with a friend about this phenomenon once, which went
something like this:
Me: Hey, have you noticed how everyone thinks I have an aura of conﬁdence and
certainty, sometimes arrogance? I don't know how to shake it, nor how it works.
What's up with that?
Him: Well, you always seem to have a solid grasp on every situation. When you're
explaining things, you answer questions quickly, deftly, and with precision.
Me: I don't think that's it, though. I'm rarely conﬁdent in the claims I'm making,
and I tend to highlight that fact. Earlier, when we were talking with [other friend]
about tools society can use to break monopolies, I was very explicit about where
my uncertainty lies, and what assumptions my models relied upon, and where
they might be ﬂawed.
Him: Yeah, but even then you were conﬁdent in what you were saying — maybe
not conﬁdent in any particular claim you made, but conﬁdent in your overall
analysis.
Me: I don't think that's it either. I'll be the ﬁrst to admit that the probabilities I put
on my propositions are pulled out of thin air, and I'll also be the ﬁrst to admit that
my hypothesis space is decrepit and that I'd be able to ﬁnd better models if I
could think better. In fact, I'm aware of a bunch of ﬂaws in the ways I think, and I
dedicate a decent amount of eﬀort to improving my own reasoning methods.
Him: ...
Me: ... I'm doing the thing right now, aren't I?
Him: Yes, yes you are.
There deﬁnitely is something of "conﬁdence" to this pattern of speech and thinking,
but it's not an empirical conﬁdence. The conﬁdence people notice in me isn't in the
content of my claims, for I'm quick to couch my claims with probability estimates and
error bars. Most of the conﬁdence isn't in my analysis, either; I'm quick to note the
ways my analyses could be ﬂawed.

Some of the conﬁdence does reside in the ways I reason; I do admit that I am much
better equipped to answer questions of the form "but why are you so much more
conﬁdent in your own reasoning than their reasoning, when they actually have more
credentials?" than most. But even there, I can note plausible biases and judgement
errors in my own reasoning processes with alacrity.
Why, then, do I come oﬀ as so conﬁdent? Why do I seem so self-assured while listing
the ways I know my brain is ﬂawed?
On reﬂection, I've concluded that (at least part of) the answer is something I call
"conﬁdence all the way up". Insofar as I'm uncertain of my content, I'm conﬁdent in
my analysis — except, I'm not fully conﬁdent in my analysis. But insofar as I'm
uncertain of my analysis, I'm conﬁdent in my reasoning procedures — except, I don't
put faith there, either. But insofar as I'm uncertain of my reasoning procedures, I'm
conﬁdent in my friends and failsafe mechanisms that will eventually force me to take
notice and to update. Except, that's not quite right either — it's more like, every lack
of conﬁdence is covered by conﬁdence one meta-level higher in the cognitive chain.
The result is something that reads socially as conﬁdence regardless of how much
empirical uncertainty I'm under.
Where does it bottom out? Well, insofar as my friends and failsafe mechanisms aren't
suﬃcient to raise errors to my attention, I expect to reason poorly in an irredeemable
fashion and then fail to achieve my goals. It bottoms out at the point where I say
"yeah, if I'm that far gone, then I fail and die."
(And somehow, I'm able to say even this while maintaining my aura of self-
assuredness and conﬁdence).
I have encountered many people who seem paralyzed by their uncertainties. They hit
a question (such as "what methods can a society use to break up monopolies?") and
they are pretty sure that they won't be able to generate the right answers, and so
they generate no answers.
And this may be a better failure mode than the failure mode of someone who has too
much conﬁdence and self-assuredness, who makes up a bunch of bad answers and
then believes them with all their heart.
Someone with Conﬁdence All The Way Up, though, can achieve the third alternative:
generate a bunch of bad answers, understand why they're bad and where their
limitations are, and use that information as best they can.
I have found this mindset to be very useful throughout my life. Conﬁdence all the way
up is what has me dive into the fray to try new things, while others stand on the
sidelines bemoaning a high degree of uncertainty. It's part of the technique of treat
recurring failures as data and training, rather than as a signal that it's time to feel
guilty. It's part of the technique of knowing you're deeply limited without letting that
interfere with your progress towards the goal. Of the top ten most competent people
I've met in person (by my estimation), eight of them seem to have some variant of
conﬁdence all the way up running. If the mindset seems foreign to you, I suggest
ﬁnding a way to practice it for a while.

Conﬁdence all the way up is about working with what you have. It's about knowing
your limitations. It's about knowing that you don't have perfect models of "what you
have" nor "your limitations", and proceeding anyway, with an even stride.
It's about knowing that there are going to be curveballs, and trusting your ability to
handle curveballs, but not all the time; and trusting your ability to get back up when
you're knocked down by a curveball you couldn't handle, but not all the time; and
coming to terms with the fact that you might be hurt so badly you can't get up.
Yes, we're limited. All humans are limited. There are important, decision-relevant facts
that we don't know. Our reasoning processes run on compromised hardware. But the
correct response to uncertainty is not to proceed at half speed!
No matter how hard you try to justify your beliefs, if you're being honest with yourself,
they won't ground out into "and therefore, no matter what I do, everything is going to
be OK." No matter how hard you try to justify your reasoning, the meta-reasoning
tower does not terminate at "and thus, eventually you will become capable of
success." They terminate at "I may be so wrong that I can never be corrected; I may
fail and all value may be lost." You will ﬁnd no objectively stable perch from which to
launch your reasoning.
But you were created already in motion. You don't need to ground out all your beliefs
and justify all your reasoning steps before you can start moving. You don't need to
have plans for every contingency before you can act. You don't need to be highly
conﬁdent in your analyses before you present a model. If you sit around awaiting
certainty, you will be waiting a long while.
Better, I say, to cover each lack of conﬁdence on one level with conﬁdence on the
next level, and to come to terms with the fact that if you're so irredeemable that even
your best meta-reasoning cannot save you, then you've already lost.

Desperation
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/desperation/
The next three posts will discuss what I dub the three dubious virtues: desperation,
recklessness, and deﬁance. I call them dubious, because each can easily turn into a
vice if used incorrectly or excessively. As you read these posts, keep in mind the law of
equal and opposite advice. Though these virtues are dubious, I have found each of
them to be a crucial component of a strong and healthy intrinsic motivation system.
The ﬁrst of the three dubious virtues is desperation. There are bad ways to be
desperate: visible desperation towards people can put you in a bad social position,
strain your relationships, or otherwise harm you. Desperation towards a goal, on the
other hand, is vital for a guilt-free intrinsic drive.
By "desperation towards a goal" I mean the possession of a goal so important to you
that you can commit yourself to it fully, without hesitation, without some part of you
wondering whether it's really worth all your eﬀort. I mean a goal that you pursue with
both reckless abandon and cautious deliberation in fair portions. I mean a goal so
important that it does not occur to you to spare time wondering whether you can
achieve it, but only whether this path to achieving it is better or worse than that path.
In my experience, the really powerful intrinsic motivations require that you're able to
struggle as if something of incredible value is on the line. That's much easier if, on a
gut level, you believe that's true.
Desperate people have a power that others lack: they have the ability to go all out, to
put all their eﬀort towards a task without reservation. Most people I have met don't
have the ability to go all out for anything, not even in their imagination.
Ask yourself: is there anything you would go all out for? Is there anything some
antagonist could put in danger, such that you would pull out all your stops? Is there
any threat so dire that you would hold nothing back, in your struggle to make things
right?
I have met many people who cannot honestly answer "yes" to this question, not even
under imaginary circumstances. If I ask them to imagine their family being kidnapped,
they say they would call the police and wait anxiously. If I ask them to imagine the
world threatened by an asteroid, they say they would do their best to enjoy their
remaining time. These are ﬁne and prudent answers. Yet, even if I ask them to
imagine strange scenarios where they and they alone can save the Earth at great
personal cost, they often say they would do it only grudgingly.
For example, imagine that aliens that want to toy with you in particular have put a
black hole on a collision course with Earth. Imagine that the only way to redirect it is
using alien tech on an alien space ship that has been left on Earth and which can be
piloted only by you and you alone — and that, to destroy the black hole, you must
cross the event horizon, never to return. Would you save the world then? And if so,
would you do it only grudgingly?
Would you do it if the spacecraft was sequestered atop Mt. Everest? How hard would
you struggle to get to the ship, if it was at the bottom of the ocean? What if it could

only be operated if you spoke ﬂuent Mandarin, and you only had one year to learn?
Would you go all out to save the world, or would you put in a token "best eﬀort", a
token "at least I tried", and then go back to enjoying your remaining time?
And if you can't go all out even in incredible imaginary scenarios where everything
depends on you, what are you holding out for?
A common protest here goes "I don't want to lose my friendships, my close
connections, my comfort. That is too high a price to pay. If the struggle would be too
brutal, then I would prefer to enjoy my remaining time instead." But if that were the
case, then why couldn't someone get you to go all out by putting your friendships,
connections, and comfort on the line? Would you ﬁght with everything you have for
those? And if not, what are you holding out for?
Why are you stopping yourself from putting in a full eﬀort, if there is no situation even
in principle which could compel you to pull out all the stops? Why are you holding part
of yourself back, if there is nothing even in imagination for which you would unbar all
the holds? If there is nothing anyone could put on the line such that you'd struggle
with all of your being, then what are you holding out for?
I'm not saying you need to be willing to go all out for something real. It may be that
the only scenarios where you'd really struggle for all you're worth are fanciful or
ridiculous. I'm saying that you need to be able to go all out in principle.
There's a certain type of vulnerability that comes with committing your whole self to
something. Our culture has strong social stigmas against people who really
unabashedly care about something.
I remember a classmate in gradeschool who really really cared about Pokemon, to the
point that others felt embarrassed just to associate with him. The stereotypical stigma
against "nerds" seems rooted at least partially in a stigma against caring too much.
Derision among the intellectual elites towards people who get really interested in
sports seems to draw at least partially on the same stigma.
Notice the negative connotations attached to words like "cultist", "zealot", and
"idealist". Notice all the people who distance themselves from whatever social
movement they're in; those people who loosely identify as "eﬀective altruists" or
"rationalist" or "skeptics" or "atheists" but feel a deep compulsion to make sure you
know that they think the other EAs/rationalists/skeptics/atheists are naive, Doing It
Wrong, and blinded by their lack of nuanced views. I think that this is, in part, an
attempt to defend against the curse of Caring Too Much.
Caring hard is uncool. The stereotypical intellectual is a detached moral non-realist
who understands that nothing really matters, and looks upon all those "caring" folk
with cynical bemusement.
Caring hard is vulnerable. If you care hard about something, then it becomes possible
to lose something very important to you. Worse, everyone around you might think
that you're putting your caring into the wrong thing, and see you as one of the naive
blind idealist sheeple, and curl their lips at you.
Desperation is about none of that mattering. It's about having a goal so important that
the social concerns drop away, except exactly insofar as they're relevant to the

achievement of your goal. It's about being willing to let yourself care more about the
task at hand than about what everyone thinks about you, no matter how much they
would deride you for fully committing.
A common barrier to desperation is that it can be diﬃcult to admit that you really,
really care about something, because then that means you are vulnerable to the loss
of something that's very, very important to you. If your desperation is visible in a
hostile social environment, desperation can destroy your ability to bargain and put
you at a social disadvantage. Being social creatures, I suspect that many of us have
mental architectures that prevent us from feeling desperation, because if we felt it,
we'd show it, and that would undermine our social standing. (In my experience,
conﬁdence all the way up helps alleviate this eﬀect.)
Thus, if you want to make desperation part of your intrinsic drive, you may need to
practice becoming able to admit, to yourself, on a gut level, that you might lose
something so terribly important that it's worth gaining a little desperation. You must
ﬁrst allow yourself to become desperate. (This is why I wrote about seeing the dark
world and coming to your terms before writing about desperation.)
There is a common failure mode among those who succeed at becoming desperate,
which is that they burn their resources too quickly, in their desperation. If you have to
get yourself into an alien spacecraft at the bottom of the ocean, and it's going to take
many months of training, social and political maneuvering, and monotonous
searching, then you would be unwise to spend your ﬁrst week all wound up at
maximum stress levels simply because you think that that's what it means to "go all
out" and "hold nothing back." If you're going to pull out all the stops and unbar all the
holds, you need to understand how to carry on a slow burn as well as a fast burn. (This
is why I wrote about how to avoid working yourself ragged and rest in motion before
writing about desperation.)
With these tools in hand, I suggest ﬁnding a way to become able to become
desperate. Perform whatever thought experiments and meditations you have to to be
able to imagine a situation where you would do everything in your power to achieve
some outcome, without regard for the consequences (beyond their aﬀect on the
outcome). Figure out the circumstances under which you'd pull out all the stops and
unbar all the holds and put everything you have into the struggle.
(If there is no situation, even in theory, where you would give everything you have
into your eﬀorts, then consider that there may be a part of yourself that you're holding
back for nothing, a part of yourself that you're wasting.)
I'm not saying you need to become desperate now. That may be unnecessary. Maybe
your life is going well enough, and your goals are well enough achieved, that the best
way to continue achieving them is to strengthen your friendships and your
connections and enjoy your comforts. If your family is kidnapped, you probably would
do best to call the police and then wait anxiously. If Earth is threatened by an asteroid,
most people would do best to leave it to the experts and enjoy what time they have.
So be it not upon me to force desperation upon you if you're leading a comfortable
life. Make sure you don't suﬀer from the listless guilt, and make sure you can in
principle become desperate, so as to ensure that you're not holding a part of yourself
back for nothing, but save the actual desperation for times of need.

If, on the other hand, you are in a time of need, if you're the sort who sees every
death as a tragedy, if you're otherwise ﬁghting for something larger than yourself,
then get desperate now.
The ﬁrst step is allowing yourself to become desperate in principle. It's allowing there
to be at least one imaginary scenario where you'd let yourself commit fully to a task
without hesitation. Once you are able to do this, imagine the feeling that would come
over you when you ﬁrst committed yourself to that crucial undertaking, come
whatever may. Is there a sense of desperation you would feel, a grasping need to
change the future? Sit with it, become familiar with the sensation of desperation and
any other feelings associated with the imaginary commitment.
Once you've gained some familiarity with those feelings, look with fresh eyes at what
you're ﬁghting for, at what you have to protect, at what you value, and see if any of it
is worthy of a little desperation.

Recklessness
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/recklessness/
The second dubious virtue is recklessness. As with desperation, there are many bad
ways to be reckless. There is a nihilistic recklessness, in those with a muted ability to
feel and care, that is self-destructive. There is a social recklessness, when peers push
each other towards doing something dangerous that none of them would do alone, in
a demonstration of commitment that can become needlessly dangerous. And there is
a ﬁery, destructive recklessness in those too quick to anger, which can lead people to
actions they will regret for a lifetime. I caution against all these types of recklessness.
Nevertheless, there is a type of recklessness that is a virtue. This is recklessness in
the pursuit of an external goal, and I have found it to be rather rare.
I get a lot of questions from people about how cautious they should be as they make
changes in their lives. If they remove their guilt motivation, will they be able to do
anything at all? If they really try to understand how screwed up the world is, on a gut
level, will they break? If they devote their eﬀorts to the pursuit of something larger
than them, will they lose touch with their humanity, and with their ability to connect to
other human beings?
And I tend to answer: You are not made of glass.
Dive in. Change things. Fix problems. If more problems crop up, ﬁx those too.
Imagine that you look upon yourself, detect harmful guilt-based motivation, tear it
out, and then notice that this leaves you with a Zen-like lack of drive, such that most
of yourself is now happy to let days slip by but some small part of you is crying out
that something is wrong. Recklessness-the-virtue is about being in that state and
deciding to push forward rather than retreating; deciding to make a desperate eﬀort
to acquire a new drive, rather than panicking and retreating back towards guilt.
Recklessness is about ripping oﬀ the blinders that prevent you from seeing the dark
world on a gut level, and knowing that if this happens to be debilitating then you'll
ﬁnd some new way to handle it, rather than being forced to retreat.
Always forward, never back. Be unable to despair. Have conﬁdence all the way up.
Think of all the people you know who are too stagnant, too cautious about breaking
something important, to ever change at all.
You can recover from breaking a few parts of yourself, so long as you're modular
rather than fragile. You can become able to roll with a few punches.
(This seems like a good time to insert a heavy-handed reminder about the law of
equal and opposite advice! Many people would do well to gain a little recklessness,
but many others need less recklessness and more caution. If you're in a particularly
fragile mental state, consider disregarding this post entirely.)
During my undergraduate education, I was the president of an entrepreneurship club.
The ﬁrst most common type of person who would drop by asking for advice was that

young wannabe founder all full of naïve excitement about some half-formed notion
that they're about to make the next facebook. The second most common person was
that competent programmer with an idea that wasn't half-bad — maybe they had
some idea for an app that would let couples communicate in a way they couldn't yet
easily do, six years ago — but, being tempered and level-headed and well aware of
the naïvety of the ﬁrst folks, were entirely unable to commit to their idea.
Both sets of prospective entrepreneurs were doomed to failure. The ﬁrst set, for all the
obvious reasons — they'd focus too narrowly on writing code that no one would ever
buy, or fail to ﬁnd their ﬁrst users, or fail to make a minimum testable product, or
they'd dramatically misunderstand and underestimate the diﬃculty of the technical
challenges, or whatever.
The second set would fail because they didn't really expect themselves to succeed.
They could make themselves work on their idea, while reciting to themselves some
story about being risk-loving, but they couldn't get their head into the idea, to the
point where they were spending fourteen hours a day working feverishly while plans
and paths and strategies dominated their waking thoughts.
There's a fugue state that successful entrepreneurs report entering, which the second
set of people had rendered themselves unable to enter. Somehow, their realistic
understating of their odds destroyed their ability to commit.
In one fashion, this makes some sense: they, knowing that great success is likely a lie,
cannot fool their innermost self into believing in their own vision, which precludes
them from entering the fugue state.
But in another fashion, is silly. What do the odds have to do with your ability to
commit? Why is their epistemic state preventing them from entering the emotional
state that would most help them succeed?
I think there are a few diﬀerent skills it takes to be able to ender the fugue state even
while knowing that your odds of success are low. One of them, I think, is the virtue of
recklessness.
Recklessness is in the ability to say "screw the odds, I'm going to push forward on this
path as hard as I can until a better path appears." If the odds are low, a better path is
more likely to appear sooner rather than later — but the reckless let that be a fact
about the paths, and they don't further allow low odds to prevent them from pushing
forward on the best path they can currently see, as fast as possible.
If you want to become a successful entrepreneur, or if you want to succeed at other
very diﬃcult tasks, it helps to be able to take the best from both types of hopeless
entrepreneurs. Become the sort of person who can enter the fugue state and give an
idea your all, while also being able to see and avoid all the common failure modes.
The fact that you are unlikely to succeed is an epistemic fact, you do not need to give
it dominion over your motivation. Be a little reckless.
Recklessness, as a virtue, is about being able to throw caution to the wind. It's about
being able to commit yourself fully to the best path before you, and then change your
entire life at the drop of a pin as soon as a better path appears. It's about being free to
act without worrying too much about what happens if you disrupt the status quo —
too many people are already too stagnant, and we need to move faster.

So if you ﬁnd yourself knowing what it is that you need to do next, but worried that
doing so will break something else important...
then I say, do it.
Act.
Try not to break anything vital, but if you do, ﬁx it and keep moving.
Always forward, never back.
Be a little reckless.

Deﬁance
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/deﬁance/
The third dubious virtue is deﬁance. As with the other dubious virtues, it can get you
into trouble. Remember the law of equal and opposite advice. Used correctly, it can
play a key role in a healthy guilt-free motivation system.
I used to tell people that I'm roughly 90% deﬁance-fueled. The most common
response was "ha ha I guess you can be manipulated by reverse psychology, then";
which led me to realize that I didn't yet know how to convey what I meant by
"deﬁance fuel," so I stopped saying it. Today, we see whether I can convey what I
mean by "deﬁance fuel" yet.
Most people I talk to about deﬁance think of it as a mental stance adopted against
some authority ﬁgure. Perhaps they imagine a parental ﬁgure saying "ﬁnish your
broccoli," and a child who hates broccoli with their jaw set and smolder in their eyes,
who proceeds to eat with as much petulance as they can muster, plotting their
revenge. The feeling we imagine in that child is perhaps the standard central example
of "deﬁance."
I claim that that child does possess deﬁance-the-virtue, but not in their petulance, and
not in their opposition to an authority ﬁgure. Deﬁance-the-action is in the child
chewing with their mouth open in an open refusal to submit; deﬁance-the-virtue is in
the mental actions they make before they start chewing with their mouth open. It's in
the internal steeling they do when deciding not to be ordered around. It's in their
decision to be self-reliant, it's in their refusal to take orders lying down. If these
automatic and subconscious mental motions were verbalized, they might be written "I
am my own person; and not beholden to your whims," or "if you push me, I push
back." But they aren't verbalized, because they aren't conscious. They're reﬂexive.
Deﬁance-the-virtue is about encountering a badness that's brewing in the world, and
reﬂexively doing everything you can to throw a wrench in the works, to twist things in
your favor. Deﬁance-the-virtue is about taking nothing lying down, and refusing to let
badnesses in the universe slide.
Deﬁance isn't about acting petulantly without hesitation: A deﬁant child might bide
their time, knowing that if they act rashly there will be harsh consequences. Deﬁance
is about resisting the default state of aﬀairs without hesitation: A deﬁant child might
weigh their options and bide their time, but at no point do they wonder whether they
should defy. They simply dislike the situation, and so rebel against it.
Deﬁance-the-virtue is about having that reaction, to something that's wrong in the
world.
Of course, there's an art to defying the right things. I do recommend defying death; I
don't recommend having the "deﬁance" reaction against people who tell you to do
things in a stern and authoritative voice. People who order you around can either be
ignored or obeyed according to the social context, but they aren't usually worth
defying, except perhaps in situations where you legitimately need to demonstrate that
you're not beholden to them, and where gentler reminders have failed.

As a rule of thumb, I suggest that it's usually healthy to have a deﬁance reaction
towards states of the world, and usually unhealthy to have a deﬁance reaction
towards people.
To illustrate the diﬀerence, imagine you're Neo, twenty years after the ﬁrst matrix
movie. The sequels never happened; instead you got trapped in the matrix while one
by one, all your connections to the outside world died or disappeared. One day, you
lost your grasp on your ability to control the matrix, your abilities slipping through
your grasp like lucidity slipping away in a dream. Now you stand atop a skyscraper,
looking across the gap at its twin, unable to quite recall what it was like to ﬂy.
You stand there frozen, desperate to recall what you once knew, ﬁnding it evasive.
Behind you, someone else enters the rooftop and shouts at you over the wind.
"What the hell are you doing, you idiot?" they cry. "Get back from there! Now!"
Deﬁance-against-a-person would be to feel a burning need to show this person up,
show them that you're not beholden to their demands, and possibly do something
rash.
Deﬁance-against-the-world would be to hear this person cry out, and use the impetus
to remember what it was you used to know. You would say, "Oh, right. I'm in the
matrix." You would remember that the rules and customs of this place do not have
dominion over you, no matter what illusions the people around you are taken in by.
Your mind would snap back into focus. You would grab what you had forgotten how to
grasp, and leap.
(And those with deﬁance-the-virtue deeply instilled in them don't need the impetus
provided by another person to access the mental state — deﬁance is a property of the
relationship between them and the state of the world that they can recall at will, not a
property of the relationships between them and others.)
This is the deﬁance I mean to talk about. It's related to level hopping and skepticism
about your limitations. It's related to the skill of measuring your progress not against
others, but against what actually happens.
I've been writing a long sequence of posts on how to replace guilt-based motivation
with something else. Many people have remarked to me that my writings on averting
guilt seem inspired by Taoism. And: maybe. There are some parallels. But not here,
not with deﬁance.
Deﬁance is not about coming to terms with the world. It's about looking looking at the
world and having the same mental reﬂexes as the deﬁant child. It's about the reﬂexive
impulse to say "screw this" and choose self-reliance over hopelessness in the face of
problems that are crushingly large. It's about a deep-seated inability to go gently into
that good night. It's about being able to look at the terrible social equilibria we're all
trapped in and get pissed oﬀ — not because any individual is evil, but because almost
nobody is evil and everything is broken anyway.
Above all, it's about seeing that the wold is broken, and feeling something akin to
"fuck these mortal constraints, I'm ﬁxing things."
When the deﬁant child eats their vegetables with as much spite as is humanly
possible, there was never a thought that crossed their mind about capitulating to their

parents. Petulance was an automatic response. They weren't carefully weighing a
decision about whether to spite their parents — at best, they may have carefully
weighed a decision about whether to get their payback now, overtly; or later, subtly.
The deﬁance was a reﬂex; the fact that they weren't going to submit quietly to
authority was never in question.
Deﬁance-the-virtue is about having the same reﬂexive response, not towards an
authority ﬁgure, but towards the state of a broken world. It's about making the fact
that you struggle to ﬁx broken worlds automatic and unspoken — you might weigh
your options and bide your time, but you spare no thought for whether you will
struggle.
I don't know how to teach deﬁance, but it's one of the keystones of my motivation
system. If you want to build yourself a motivation system akin to mine, deﬁance is an
important component.
So this is how I suggest motivating yourself in place of guilt: Let the wrongness of the
world trigger something deep inside of you, such that the question stops being
whether you will capitulate or lose hope, and becomes how you will wrest the course
of the future onto a diﬀerent path. See the current state of aﬀairs as your adversary;
see the future as the prize that hangs in the balance. Shake oﬀ the illusory
constraints, set your jaw, and rebel. Defy.
Allow yourself to be a little reckless. Get a little desperate. Let deﬁance of the way
things are burn in you. Then act.

How we will be measured
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/how-we-will-be-measured/
After nearly a year of writing, my "replacing guilt" sequence is coming to a close. I
have just one more thing to say on the subject, by pointing out a running theme
throughout the series.
When all is said and done, and Nature passes her ﬁnal judgement, you will not be
measured by the number of moments in which you worked as hard as you could. You
will not be judged by someone rooting around in your mind to see whether you were
good or bad. You will not be evaluated according to how unassailable your
explanations are, for why the things that you couldn't possibly have prevented the
things that went wrong.
You will be measured only by what actually happens, as will we all.
That doesn't mean all of us are using the same measuring stick: Some people are
working to ensure that our universe-history is one in which they in particular have a
happy and fulﬁlled life; others are working to ensure that our universe-history is one in
which their children never have to debase themselves to survive. Still others look
wide, and see poverty and destitution and suﬀering, and work to ensure that those
blemishes fade from our universe-history, in the places they can reach, near the time
of their lives. Others look far forward, working to ensure that our universe-history is
full of ﬂourishing sentient civilizations and other nice things.
All it means is that the type of thing we're all trying to do, one way or another, is
ensure that the actual history of our universe, the actual timeless structure of the
place we're embedded, is as desirable as possible. That's the type of game we're
playing: We manipulate universe-histories, for the sake of the future.
Some people have a listless guilt, thinking that nothing matters but feeling vaguely
restless as they watch themselves spend their lives on things they think are pointless.
Other people have a pointed guilt, thinking that everything matters, and berating
themselves whenever they fall short of perfection. For me, the framing that we act to
determine the shape of our actual universe-history is a framing that avoids both these
pitfalls. Is there a way you want the completed, timeless story of our universe to go?
Then act to ensure that the future is as good as you can make it. Are you wracked
with guilt about your inability to act as you wish, or regret for the things you did in the
past? Then act to ensure that the future is as good as you can make it. That's the sort
of game we're playing: At all times, act to ensure that our future is bright.
I think many people get a bit mixed up about what type of game we're playing. They
get stuck playing a social game, measuring their accomplishments by comparison to
the accomplishments of their neighbors; or they mistake someone else's expectations
for their preferences and get stuck chasing lost purposes; or someone slights them
and their vision narrows as their sole objective becomes retaliation.
I'm not saying social goals are intrinsically bad. Wealth and status are useful aids
when it comes to determining the future; the accomplishments and expectations of
your peers can provide useful measurements of your abilities. But there's a diﬀerence
between pursuing social goals for the sake of determining the course of our universe-

history, and forgetting entirely that success is measured in terms of what actually
happens throughout the course of history.
I alluded to this when I described deﬁance as "choosing self-reliance." At the end of
the day, each and every one of us is engaged in a personal struggle to determine the
future. We are not alone; there are many around us who can be friends and allies and
support us in our struggle. But the goal, in the end, is to use what resources we have
at our disposal to ensure that the universe-history is ﬁlled with light, whatever our
light may be. I hope yours includes friends and family and loved ones, but making it
happen — that is your personal task. You are encouraged to draw on the support of
friends and allies where possible; and ensuring that you have close connections may
be one of the properties you're putting into the timeless history of our universe: But
even then, the task of ensuring our universe-history is one in which you have close
connections is your personal task.
What we are doing, on this earth, is acting in such a way that our future is ﬁlled with
light. From this framing, "guilt-based motivation" is a foreign concept: If you start to
feel guilty, simply look at your situation with fresh eyes, and then act such that the
future is ﬁlled with light. Our lives are not status competitions; the world is not a
proving ground. We are participating in a gambit for the future (or, more likely, a
gambit for the shape of the multiverse), and that is all.
When there are people who oppose us out of nothing save for petty spite; when there
are obstacles that stand between us and something important to us which seem all
but insurmountable; when we encounter personal limitations that prevent us from
acting as we wish to; it is easy to confuse retaliation, overcoming adversity, and
growing stronger, with our actual goals. But crossing those hurdles is not the ﬁnal
objective: those hurdles are only parameters in our calculations about how to aﬀect
the future; they are nothing but the state of the game board in a game with cosmic
states.
In that game, some people have stronger positions than others, and more leverage
with which to determine the timeless story of our universe. Life isn't fair. But all of us,
one way or another, are here to make sure that our universe history is ﬁlled with light
— whatever 'light' may be to each of us.
So ﬁnd allies, ﬁnd friends, ﬁnd everything you need to improve your ability to ensure
that our universe-history tells a story you like. Move towards whatever levers on our
future you can ﬁnd. And then ﬁll it with light.

On Caring
This is an essay describing some of my motivation to be an eﬀective altruist. It is
crossposted from my blog. Many of the ideas here are quite similar to others found in
the sequences. I have a slightly diﬀerent take, and after adjusting for the typical mind
fallacy I expect that this post may contain insights that are new to many.
1
I'm not very good at feeling the size of large numbers. Once you start tossing around
numbers larger than 1000 (or maybe even 100), the numbers just seem "big".
Consider Sirius, the brightest star in the night sky. If you told me that Sirius is as big as
a million earths, I would feel like that's a lot of Earths. If, instead, you told me that you
could ﬁt a billion Earths inside Sirius... I would still just feel like that's a lot of Earths.
The feelings are almost identical. In context, my brain grudgingly admits that a billion
is a lot larger than a million, and puts forth a token eﬀort to feel like a billion-Earth-
sized star is bigger than a million-Earth-sized star. But out of context — if I wasn't
anchored at "a million" when I heard "a billion" — both these numbers just feel vaguely
large.
I feel a little respect for the bigness of numbers, if you pick really really large numbers.
If you say "one followed by a hundred zeroes", then this feels a lot bigger than a billion.
But it certainly doesn't feel (in my gut) like it's 10 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000
000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000
000 000 000 times bigger than a billion. Not in the way that four apples internally feels
like twice as many as two apples. My brain can't even begin to wrap itself around this
sort of magnitude diﬀerential.
This phenomena is related to scope insensitivity, and it's important to me because I
live in a world where sometimes the things I care about are really really numerous.
For example, billions of people live in squalor, with hundreds of millions of them
deprived of basic needs and/or dying from disease. And though most of them are out of
my sight, I still care about them.
The loss of a human life with all is joys and all its sorrows is tragic no matter what the
cause, and the tragedy is not reduced simply because I was far away, or because I did
not know of it, or because I did not know how to help, or because I was not personally
responsible.
Knowing this, I care about every single individual on this planet. The problem is, my
brain is simply incapable of taking the amount of caring I feel for a single person and
scaling it up by a billion times. I lack the internal capacity to feel that much. My care-o-
meter simply doesn't go up that far.
And this is a problem.
2

It's a common trope that courage isn't about being fearless, it's about being afraid but
doing the right thing anyway. In the same sense, caring about the world isn't about
having a gut feeling that corresponds to the amount of suﬀering in the world, it's about
doing the right thing anyway. Even without the feeling.
My internal care-o-meter was calibrated to deal with about a hundred and ﬁfty people,
and it simply can't express the amount of caring that I have for billions of suﬀerers. The
internal care-o-meter just doesn't go up that high.
Humanity is playing for unimaginably high stakes. At the very least, there are billions of
people suﬀering today. At the worst, there are quadrillions (or more) potential humans,
transhumans, or posthumans whose existence depends upon what we do here and
now. All the intricate civilizations that the future could hold, the experience and art and
beauty that is possible in the future, depends upon the present.
When you're faced with stakes like these, your internal caring heuristics — calibrated
on numbers like "ten" or "twenty" — completely fail to grasp the gravity of the
situation.
Saving a person's life feels great, and it would probably feel just about as good to save
one life as it would feel to save the world. It surely wouldn't be many billion times more
of a high to save the world, because your hardware can't express a feeling a billion
times bigger than the feeling of saving a person's life. But even though the altruistic
high from saving someone's life would be shockingly similar to the altruistic high from
saving the world, always remember that behind those similar feelings there is a whole
world of diﬀerence.
Our internal care-feelings are woefully inadequate for deciding how to act in a world
with big problems.
3
There's a mental shift that happened to me when I ﬁrst started internalizing scope
insensitivity. It is a little diﬃcult to articulate, so I'm going to start with a few stories.
Consider Alice, a software engineer at Amazon in Seattle. Once a month or so, those
college students will show up on street corners with clipboards, looking ever more
disillusioned as they struggle to convince people to donate to Doctors Without Borders.
Usually, Alice avoids eye contact and goes about her day, but this month they ﬁnally
manage to corner her. They explain Doctors Without Borders, and she actually has to
admit that it sounds like a pretty good cause. She ends up handing them $20 through a
combination of guilt, social pressure, and altruism, and then rushes back to work. (Next
month, when they show up again, she avoids eye contact.)
Now consider Bob, who has been given the Ice Bucket Challenge by a friend on
facebook. He feels too busy to do the ice bucket challenge, and instead just donates
$100 to ALSA.
Now consider Christine, who is in the college sorority ΑΔΠ. ΑΔΠ is engaged in a
competition with ΠΒΦ (another sorority) to see who can raise the most money for the
National Breast Cancer Foundation in a week. Christine has a competitive spirit and
gets engaged in fund-raising, and gives a few hundred dollars herself over the course
of the week (especially at times when ΑΔΠ is especially behind).

All three of these people are donating money to charitable organizations... and that's
great. But notice that there's something similar in these three stories: these donations
are largely motivated by a social context. Alice feels obligation and social pressure. Bob
feels social pressure and maybe a bit of camaraderie. Christine feels camaraderie and
competitiveness. These are all ﬁne motivations, but notice that these motivations are
related to the social setting, and only tangentially to the content of the charitable
donation.
If you took any of Alice or Bob or Christine and asked them why they aren't donating all
of their time and money to these causes that they apparently believe are worthwhile,
they'd look at you funny and they'd probably think you were being rude (with good
reason!). If you pressed, they might tell you that money is a little tight right now, or
that they would donate more if they were a better person.
But the question would still feel kind of wrong. Giving all your money away is just not
what you do with money. We can all say out loud that people who give all their
possessions away are really great, but behind closed doors we all know that people are
crazy. (Good crazy, perhaps, but crazy all the same.)
This is a mindset that I inhabited for a while. There's an alternative mindset that can hit
you like a freight train when you start internalizing scope insensitivity.
4
Consider Daniel, a college student shortly after the Deepwater Horizon BP oil spill. He
encounters one of those college students with the clipboards on the street corners,
soliciting donations to the World Wildlife Foundation. They're trying to save as many
oiled birds as possible. Normally, Daniel would simply dismiss the charity as Not The
Most Important Thing, or Not Worth His Time Right Now, or Somebody Else's Problem,
but this time Daniel has been thinking about how his brain is bad at numbers and
decides to do a quick sanity check.
He pictures himself walking along the beach after the oil spill, and encountering a
group of people cleaning birds as fast as they can. They simply don't have the
resources to clean all the available birds. A pathetic young bird ﬂops towards his feet,
slick with oil, eyes barely able to open. He kneels down to pick it up and help it onto
the table. One of the bird-cleaners informs him that they won't have time to get to that
bird themselves, but he could pull on some gloves and could probably save the bird
with three minutes of washing.

Daniel decides that he would spend three minutes of his time to save the bird, and that
he would also be happy to pay at least $3 to have someone else spend a few minutes
cleaning the bird. He introspects and ﬁnds that this is not just because he imagined a
bird right in front of him: he feels that it is worth at least three minutes of his time (or
$3) to save an oiled bird in some vague platonic sense.
And, because he's been thinking about scope insensitivity, he expects his brain to
misreport how much he actually cares about large numbers of birds: the internal
feeling of caring can't be expected to line up with the actual importance of the
situation. So instead of just asking his gut how much he cares about de-oiling lots of
birds, he shuts up and multiplies.
Thousands and thousands of birds were oiled by the BP spill alone. After shutting up
and multiplying, Daniel realizes (with growing horror) that the amount he acutally cares
about oiled birds is lower bounded by two months of hard work and/or ﬁfty thousand
dollars. And that's not even counting wildlife threatened by other oil spills.
And if he cares that much about de-oiling birds, then how much does he actually care
about factory farming, nevermind hunger, or poverty, or sickness? How much does he
actually care about wars that ravage nations? About neglected, deprived children?

About the future of humanity? He actually cares about these things to the tune of much
more money than he has, and much more time than he has.
For the ﬁrst time, Daniel sees a glimpse of of how much he actually cares, and how
poor a state the world is in.
This has the strange eﬀect that Daniel's reasoning goes full-circle, and he realizes that
he actually can't care about oiled birds to the tune of 3 minutes or $3: not because the
birds aren't worth the time and money (and, in fact, he thinks that the economy
produces things priced at $3 which are worth less than the bird's survival), but because
he can't spend his time or money on saving the birds. The opportunity cost suddenly
seems far too high: there is too much else to do! People are sick and starving and
dying! The very future of our civilization is at stake!
Daniel doesn't wind up giving $50k to the WWF, and he also doesn't donate to ALSA or
NBCF. But if you ask Daniel why he's not donating all his money, he won't look at you
funny or think you're rude. He's left the place where you don't care far behind, and has
realized that his mind was lying to him the whole time about the gravity of the real
problems.
Now he realizes that he can't possibly do enough. After adjusting for his scope
insensitivity (and the fact that his brain lies about the size of large numbers), even the
"less important" causes like the WWF suddenly seem worthy of dedicating a life to.
Wildlife destruction and ALS and breast cancer are suddenly all problems that he would
move mountains to solve — except he's ﬁnally understood that there are just too many
mountains, and ALS isn't the bottleneck, and AHHH HOW DID ALL THESE MOUNTAINS
GET HERE?
In the original mindstate, the reason he didn't drop everything to work on ALS was
because it just didn't seem... pressing enough. Or tractable enough. Or important
enough. Kind of. These are sort of the reason, but the real reason is more that the
concept of "dropping everything to address ALS" never even crossed his mind as a real
possibility. The idea was too much of a break from the standard narrative. It wasn't his
problem.
In the new mindstate, everything is his problem. The only reason he's not dropping
everything to work on ALS is because there are far too many things to do ﬁrst.
Alice and Bob and Christine usually aren't spending time solving all the world's
problems because they forget to see them. If you remind them — put them in a social
context where they remember how much they care (hopefully without guilt or pressure)
— then they'll likely donate a little money.
By contrast, Daniel and others who have undergone the mental shift aren't spending
time solving all the world's problems because there are just too many problems.
(Daniel hopefully goes on to discover movements like eﬀective altruism and starts
contributing towards ﬁxing the world's most pressing problems.)
5
I'm not trying to preach here about how to be a good person. You don't need to share
my viewpoint to be a good person (obviously).

Rather, I'm trying to point at a shift in perspective. Many of us go through life
understanding that we should care about people suﬀering far away from us, but failing
to. I think that this attitude is tied, at least in part, to the fact that most of us implicitly
trust our internal care-o-meters.
The "care feeling" isn't usually strong enough to compel us to frantically save everyone
dying. So while we acknowledge that it would be virtuous to do more for the world, we
think that we can't, because we weren't gifted with that virtuous extra-caring that
prominent altruists must have.
But this is an error — prominent altruists aren't the people who have a larger care-o-
meter, they're the people who have learned not to trust their care-o-meters.
Our care-o-meters are broken. They don't work on large numbers. Nobody has one
capable of faithfully representing the scope of the world's problems. But the fact that
you can't feel the caring doesn't mean that you can't do the caring.
You don't get to feel the appropriate amount of "care", in your body. Sorry — the
world's problems are just too large, and your body is not built to respond appropriately
to problems of this magnitude. But if you choose to do so, you can still act like the
world's problems are as big as they are. You can stop trusting the internal feelings to
guide your actions and switch over to manual control.
6
This, of course, leads us to the question of "what the hell do you then?"
And I don't really know yet. (Though I'll plug the Giving What We Can pledge, GiveWell,
MIRI, and The Future of Humanity Institute as a good start).
I think that at least part of it comes from a certain sort of desperate perspective. It's
not enough to think you should change the world — you also need the sort of
desperation that comes from realizing that you would dedicate your entire life to
solving the world's 100th biggest problem if you could, but you can't, because there
are 99 bigger problems you have to address ﬁrst.
I'm not trying to guilt you into giving more money away — becoming a philanthropist is
really really hard. (If you're already a philanthropist, then you have my acclaim and my
aﬀection.) First it requires you to have money, which is uncommon, and then it requires
you to throw that money at distant invisible problems, which is not an easy sell to a
human brain. Akrasia is a formidable enemy. And most importantly, guilt doesn't seem
like a good long-term motivator: if you want to join the ranks of people saving the
world, I would rather you join them proudly. There are many trials and tribulations
ahead, and we'd do better to face them with our heads held high.
7
Courage isn't about being fearless, it's about being able to do the right thing even if
you're afraid.
And similarly, addressing the major problems of our time isn't about feeling a strong
compulsion to do so. It's about doing it anyway, even when internal compulsion utterly

fails to capture the scope of the problems we face.
It's easy to look at especially virtuous people — Gandhi, Mother Theresa, Nelson
Mandela — and conclude that they must have cared more than we do. But I don't think
that's the case.
Nobody gets to comprehend the scope of these problems. The closest we can get is
doing the multiplication: ﬁnding something we care about, putting a number on it, and
multiplying. And then trusting the numbers more than we trust our feelings.
Because our feelings lie to us.
When you do the multiplication, you realize that addressing global poverty and building
a brighter future deserve more resources than currently exist. There is not enough
money, time, or eﬀort in the world to do what we need to do.
There is only you, and me, and everyone else who is trying anyway.
8
You can't actually feel the weight of the world. The human mind is not capable of that
feat.
But sometimes, you can catch a glimpse.

The Value of a Life
This is a linkpost for http://mindingourway.com/the-value-of-a-life/
This post is cross-posted from MindingOurWay . It's about some of my reasons for
being an eﬀective altruist. It's targeted more towards people who aren't EAs or who
haven't heard of eﬀective altruism, but some people here may also ﬁnd it inspiring.
If you have money and want to save lives, you had better put a price on life. Scott
Alexander explains it better than I can.
But don't mix up the price of a life with the value of a life. I see this happen all too
frequently. To correct this mistake, I'm going to tell a little story.
 
Once upon a time, there was a village of peaceful immortal humans. They did not age
past their primes, but they could still die from starvation or injury. But perhaps
because their lives were so long and full, they all valued each other very highly and
lived in peace. Indeed, there were no lengths to which the villagers would not go in
order to save one of their fellows from unwanted annihilation.
Or, at least, that's how life was before the dragon came.
Dragons desire two things from people, as I'm sure you know: gold, and ﬂesh. And this
dragon, woe be upon the villagers, was powerful indeed — nigh invincible, with a
cunning to match. The dragon, easily capable of killing the entire village outright,
gave a grim ultimatum:
Each person in this village must pay a tax of gold, every year, in proportion to that
person's age. Anyone who cannot pay the tax will be eaten.
The villagers begged and pleaded, they wept and raged, but the dragon was
unmoved. It merely showed them a few heaps of rock that looked likely to make good
gold mines, and told them to get to work.
The villagers tried their best. They really did. They were not miners, but they were fast
learners. They worked themselves ragged, throwing aside stones, digging at the earth
with their bare hands until their ﬁngers bled, hunting and gathering as little as
possible, letting their shelters deteriorate — yet still, they could not make the
dragon's tax. At the end of a year, the dragon returned, and took all the gold they
had, and ten of the oldest villagers (for giving up the eldest villagers was the way to
save the most lives).
Distraught, the villagers resolved to try harder next time. They pushed themselves to
their limits and beyond. They raced against time. They grew gaunt and ragged. Their
eyes sank, their skin grew sallow, their arms thinned. They pushed themselves too
hard, until they were collapsing in the mines. The next time the dragon came, it took
all their gold and ﬁfty of their number.
Their strategy wasn't working.

But these villagers were born of humanity, and ingenuity is humanity's birthright. So
in their third year, the surviving villagers came to bitter terms with their situation, and
set to hunting and gathering and growing stronger, accepting that they had to take
care of themselves before they could take care of their friends. They set to building
picks and shovels, realizing that they could not save themselves with their hands
alone.
At the end of the third year, the dragon took all their gold and one hundred of their
number, for their infrastructure had not yet started paying oﬀ.
But by the end of the fourth year, the dragon only took two.
Shortly thereafter, the dragon (delighted by their progress) informed the villagers that
the tax would now begin increasing faster; exponentially in age.
This time, the villagers only nodded, and forged their hot fury into cold resolve.
It has been many, many years since the dragon came to the village. In fact, it is not a
village any more: the village grew to a city, and the city grew to a civilization.
The population is quite a bit younger now. The elders are wiser and more productive,
and can get more gold out of the ground per hour, but there simply comes a time
when this increased productivity is not worth the cost in lives. When that time comes,
the elders go willingly to their fate, for these people are not the type to buy their own
lives at the cost of two others.
In fact, hard tradeoﬀs such as these are commonplace. The villagers long ago
discovered specialization and economics, and now most of them don't work in the
mines. Some of them spend time growing or preparing food, others spend time
maintaining shelter, others spend time inventing new tools and mechanisms that can
keep pace with the dragon's dreadful tax. Indeed, some spend their lives on art and
entertainment — for the villagers have learned the importance of maintaining
motivation and morale.
(And some villagers, deep underground, far from the dragon's prying eyes, are
designing weapons.)
So you will ﬁnd, in this civilization, that there are people who dedicate their lives not
to mining gold, but to writing books — but if you look closely, you'll notice that this
only happens when the author can save more lives through increased morale and
productivity than they can through working in the mines directly. And so this
civilization, hellbent on saving as many people as it can every year, still produces
books and plays and movies.
Which means that in modern times, you can calculate the exact cost of saving an
additional life. It turns out that one life goes for about the same price as a thousand
movie tickets.
As it happens, two of the citizens of this dragon-ridden world, Alice and Bob, are
having a conversation about the value of a life, right now. Let's listen in:
Alice: So you see, the true value of a life is equivalent to about a thousand views on
the latest blockbuster.

Bob: Nonsense! A life is worth much more than two thousand hours of movie-viewing!
A life is nigh invaluable! You can't put a price tag on a human life!
Alice: What hollow indignation! If your actions are inconsistent with putting a price
tag on life, then there are ways you could shuﬄe money around to save more lives. If
you want to save as many people as possible with a limited amount of money, then
you must put a price on life!
Bob: But a thousand viewings of a movie simply isn't worth the same as a life! If I got
to choose between a thousand people watching another blockbuster and the life of my
mother, I'd choose the life of my mother any day!
Alice: Yes, but this intuition is inconsistent. The market for lives here is eﬀecient, and
the market has spoken, and the market says that a life is equal to about a thousand
views of the latest blockbuster. Your mother's life isn't worth more than the
accumulated pleasure that a thousand people experience when watching the latest
blockbuster! The viewing experience and your mother's life just turn out to have the
same value, and if your intuition disagrees, you'll have to ﬁx your intuition!
Do you see the errors here?
Alice and Bob are both right, and both wrong.
Alice is correct in that the villagers must treat a life as equivalent to a few thousand
hours worth of watching movies. Given that the villagers are all still trying to save
each other, those thousand people only go to the movies if the resulting boost in
motivation and morale leads them to collectively generate enough additional wealth
to save more than one additional person. If you stopped those people going to the
movies, and put their money towards producing gold instead, then less gold would be
produced overall, and more people would die. Bob must trade oﬀ two thousand movie-
hours against one life, if he wants to maximize lives saved.
But Bob is correct in that the value of a life is worth much more than two thousand
hours of viewing movies!
Alice's claim is that the sum experience of two thousand movie-hours is equal to the
intrinsic value of a life. The market has spoken, and so you must not protest, if you
want to save lives.
But in fact, the very reason that Bob must treat the thousand movie-viewings as
equivalent to a life is because those viewings lead to increased morale, which leads to
more than one life being saved. This fact does not equate the experience of a life lived
to the pleasure of the viewers.
What Alice has forgotten is that the village is plagued by a dragon.
Were it not for the dragon, these villagers would go to almost any lengths to save
each other from unwanted death. There might be some lengths to which they would
not go, some price they would not pay, in pain, sorrow, and decreased quality of life
among the rest of the villagers, in order to save a friend. But, in the absence of a
dragon, this cost would be a hell of a lot higher than two-thousand hours worth of
watching movies.

Enough analogies. Let's look at our universe, now. Our economy is not eﬃcient — it
costs a few million dollars to save a life in developed nations, and a few thousand
dollars to save a life in underdeveloped nations (where "save a life" really only means
"push death back a bit", in these dark times). Furthermore, our economy is not
maximizing for lives: humans are prone to scope insensitivity and a whole slew of
other biases that dampen their ability to care about other humans dying against their
will. Furthermore, it is important to care not only about the lives we save, but about
the lives we live.
Despite all this, we are not all that diﬀerent from those villagers in the lengths we
would go to save each other if death was not inevitable.
I don't know how the future will turn out. I don't know how we'll end up trading oﬀ the
preservation of a life against the improvement of a life against the creation of a life, if
and when we make it past this phase of scarcity. But I can tell you this: There may well
come a day when humanity would tear apart a thousand suns in order to prevent a
single untimely death.
That is the value of a life.
You still have to put a price tag on lives, and that price tag still has to somewhere
between a few thousand dollars and a few million dollars.
Imagine a button which, when pressed, picks a random number between 1 and a
million. If that number is 1, it kills a randomly selected person. How much would
somebody have to pay you to press that button?
Many people react with disgust, saying they wouldn't press such a button at any price.
They say that the value of a life is nigh inconceivable.
And this intuition is correct!
But when somebody oﬀers you ten dollars to press that button, press it anyway. Press
it, and worry about it less than you worry about driving a car for a year (which, if I did
my math right, is like pressing a button that has a one in ten thousand chance of
killing somebody each year, in return for the convenience of driving [1] [2]). If you
want to save the most lives, then you press that button for $10, and you put the
money towards saving lives.
But don't confuse the cost of a life with the value of a life!
In some parts of this world, it costs as little as a few thousand dollars to save a life. If
you act like the price on a life is higher than a few thousand dollars, if you actually
refuse a million dollars to press the button, or pay a billion dollars to save a single life,
then there were other things you could have done to save more lives. If you want to
save the most people, you must put a price tag on life according to the actual cost of
saving a life.
But you don't have to confuse the current cost of saving a life with the intrinsic value
of a life.
There is a gap there. There is a gap between how much a life is really worth, and the
price tag that you must assign. That gap is not there because your intuitions are
wrong. That gap is there because our village is being plagued by a godamn dragon.

That gap is a direct measure of the diﬀerence between the universe that is, and the
universe that should be.
That price diﬀerence, the diﬀerence between a few thousand dollars and a few
thousand suns, is a direct measure of how fucked up things are.
Most people start with an intuition that they should refuse to press the button at any
price, because lives are nigh invaluable. You can go to these people, and show them
that in order to save as many lives as possible with a bounded amount of money, they
must put a price on life. Most people, at that point, react one of two ways.
Some accept the logic and reject their intuitions. They see that, to save the most lives,
they must use a price tag. It sounds repugnant to say that the pleasure experienced
by a few million people drinking a can of soda is equivalent to the value of a life, but
(they think) that's exactly the sort of reasoning that leads someone to thinking that
life is invaluable, which is a deadly misconception. And so, wanting to save as many
people as they can with the money allotted to life-saving, they bite the bullet, and
conclude that lives were never worth all that much anyway.
Others reject the logic, and continue to claim that life is invaluable, and then try to
back up their intuitions with some strange version of ethics where saving as many
lives as possible with the money available is not the right thing to do, for convoluted
reasons.
But there's a third option here! All these people have forgotten about the dragon!
It is possible to live in a universe where it is both the case that (1) lives are nigh
invaluable, and (2) people are being annihilated constantly, against their will, in ways
that can be prevented using relatively small sums of money.
The universe is not fair! Pressing the button for $10 is the way to save the most lives,
and this very fact is a horrible thing. Lives are nigh invaluable, but you have to treat
them as if they're worth only a few thousand dollars.
This gap between price and value is unacceptable, but physics wasn't written
according to what we would accept. We live in a cold, uncaring universe; a universe
beyond the reach of God.
One day, we may slay the dragons that plague us. One day we, like the villagers in
their early days, may have the luxury of going to any length in order to prevent a
fellow sentient mind from being condemned to oblivion unwillingly. If we ever make it
that far, the worth of a life will be measured not in dollars, but in stars.
That is the value of a life. It will be the value of a life then, and it is the value of a life
now.
So when somebody oﬀers $10 to press that button, you press it. You press the hell out
of it. It's the best strategy available to you; it's the only way to save as many people
as you can. But don't ever forget that this very fact is a terrible tragedy.
Don't ever forget about the gap between how little a life costs and how much a life is
worth. For that gap is an account of the darkness in this universe, it is a measure of
how very far we have left to go.

I don't want to turn this into a sermon. But some of you, seeing the great abyss
between cost and worth clearly for the ﬁrst time, may decide that this gap is worth
closing, that our dragons are dragons are worth slaying. Some of you may be
wondering, what now? What next? This last part is for you.
Know that there are those of us who ﬁght.
Some of us work in the mines to make the dragon's tax. Others prepare for the day we
will confront the dragon — for the weapons we must bring to bear will be powerful
indeed, and may prove diﬃcult to aim.
And this is a ﬁght you can join. For some of you, ﬁghting means joining an eﬀective
cause. But for most of you, ﬁghting means putting a low price tag on lives, and then
honoring it — by purchasing lives wherever they are cheapest; by donating to highly
eﬀective causes. Remember that just as courage is about doing the right thing even
though you're afraid, caring is about doing the right thing even when you're not
overwhelmed by emotion.
If this is a ﬁght you wish to join, then I urge you to remember the ﬁrst lesson that the
villagers learned: you must care for yourself before you care for others. You do not
need to become destitute to struggle against the darkness in this universe. Any small
amount of money or eﬀort you can put towards saving lives is money and eﬀort well
spent. Pledging 10% of your earnings to an eﬀective cause is a diﬃcult achievement
worthy of great acclaim.
If you are going to stand beside us in this ﬁght, then I will welcome you no matter
what — but I would rather you join us ﬁlled with hot fury or cold resolve, rather than
with guilt or shame.
Oh, Death was never an enemy of ours!
We laughed with him, we leagued with him, old chum.
No soldier's paid to kick against his powers.
We laughed, knowing that better men would come,
And greater wars; when each proud ﬁghter brags
He wars on Death, for lives; not men, for ﬂags.
— Final stanza of The Next War, by Wilfred Owen
 

Moving towards the goal
This is a linkpost for http://mindingourway.com/moving-towards-the-goal/
This post contains some advice. I dare not call it obvious, as the illusion of
transparency is ever-present. I will call it simple, but people occasionally remind me
that they really appreciate the simple advice. So here we go:
1
(As usual, this advice is not for everyone; today I am primarily speaking to those who
have something to protect.)
I have been spending quite a bit of time, recently, working with people who are
explicitly trying to hop on a higher growth curve and have a larger impact on the
world. (Most of them eﬀective altruists.) They wonder how the big problems can be
solved, or how one single person can themselves move the needle in a meaningful
way. They ask questions like "what needs to be done?", or "what sort of high impact
things can I do right now?"
I think this is the wrong way of looking at things.
When I have a big problem that I want solved, I have found that there is one simple
process which tends to work. It goes like this:
1. Move towards the goal.
(It's simple, not easy.)
If you follow this process, you either win or you die. (Or you run out of time. Speed is
encouraged. So are shortcuts, so is cheating.)
The diﬃcult part is hidden within step 1: it's often hard to keep moving towards the
goal. It's diﬃcult to stay motivated. It's diﬃcult to stay focused, especially when
pursuing an ambitious goal such as "end ageing," which requires overcoming some
fairly signiﬁcant obstacles.
But we are human beings. We are the single most powerful optimization process in the
known universe, with the only exception being groups of human beings. If we set
ourselves to something and don't stop, we either suceed or we die. There's a whole
slew of advice which helps make the former outcome more likely than the latter (via
eﬃciency, etc.), but ﬁrst it is necessary to begin.
Moving towards the goal doesn't mean you have to work directly on whatever problem
you're solving. If you're trying to end aging, then putting on a lab coat and combining
random chemicals likely won't do you much good.
Rather, moving towards the goal is about always acting to solve the problem, with
each motion. Identify the path to the goal that seems shortest, and then walk it.
Maybe you need to acquire ﬁnancial stability ﬁrst, and more knowledge second.
Maybe you need to expand your social network, or fulﬁll your social attachment
needs. Maybe you need to acquire a new skill. Maybe you have no idea how to start,

in which case you need to gain more information, do some thinking, and gain a higher
vantage point from which to search for a path to the goal.
But no matter what, there is always some way to keep moving towards the goal. Get
stronger. Get smarter. Return with allies at your back.
2
Here's the pattern that this advice is designed to work against: consider the eﬀective
altruist, asking "what needs to be done?", or "what sort of high impact things can I do
right now?"
I expect people to go much farther by ﬁrst identifying an actual goal, and then moving
towards it. Which breaks my one-step advice above into a more practical two-step
process:
Step 1: identify the goal. Figure out what you're actually trying to accomplish.
Probe your motivations, and trace them back to something that compels.
I'm not suggesting tracing your motivations all the way up to "ﬁnal" goals; it's a bit
presumptuous to claim knowledge of "ﬁnal goals" given modern introspective
capabilities. Rather, look for important problems that you're trying to solve in the
world today.
For example, you might be trying to ﬁx education, end hunger, eliminate a disease,
prevent aging, become immortal, end suﬀering, prevent human extinction, or
whatever. None of these are ends unto themselves, but they're all problems that need
solving.
Identifying a goal that compels—that really needs to be solved, and that won't be
solved (or won't be solved fast enough) by default—is not always an easy task. Many
people are locked into a mindset where they couldn't possibly actually solve any big
problems, because big problems are big and people are small. Breaking out of that
mindset is a topic for another day; for now I'll assume you have picked your poison
and identiﬁed some goal to achieve, even if only a minor one.
Step 2: move towards it. So, you've found a goal. Nice work.
Now solve it tomorrow.
Can you? Seriously ask yourself whether or not you can solve the problem tomorrow. I
don't care how ambitious it is. Can you solve it tomorrow? If yes, then do it. If not, why
not? Say the obstacles aloud.
The usual answers are something like "I lack the power, time, money, network, and so
on." Which is great! Now we're getting somewhere.
These are what you need to work on tomorrow, if you want to solve the problem.
Don't ask "what would be good to do," ask "what is standing between me and solving
the problem immediately." Identify the obstacles. Your task is now to either remove
them or cheat your way around them.

Of course, most of the obstacles themselves are still too big and vague. So ask
yourself why you can't solve those problems tomorrow. Say you don't know the people
you'd need to know to have a shot at ﬁxing education. Can you contact them all
tomorrow? That probably wouldn't go well, but why not? What are the obstacles
between you and acquiring the resources you're going to need?
Rinse, repeat. Identify the obstacles to overcoming the obstacles, and so on.
Eventually, this process will ground out in things that you can actually start doing
tomorrow, with a path that you can trace all the way back up to your goal.
Once you have that, throw reservations to the wind, and start today.
3
Moving towards the goal doesn't solve the whole problem. If you want to solve a goal
eﬀectively, in the time allotted, it is important to approach the obstacles in the right
order, to identify the ones you can safely cheat past, to correctly distinguish between
short paths to the goal and long ones. But many people aren't there yet: they're still
asking "what would be good for me to do," and not "what stands between me and
solving the whole problem tomorrow."
My advice, if you want to be eﬀective, is always be solving the problem. With each
motion, be overcoming an obstacle that stands between you and the goal. If the
obstacles are too large, then your next task is to get stronger, get smarter, or ﬁnd a
way around. That is what it means, to ﬁnd a path to the goal.
To achieve a goal, simply keep moving along that path.

Self-signaling the ability to do what
you want
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/self-signaling-the-ability-to-do-what-
you-want/
1
In college, I would often ﬁnd that I had just a little bit too much food. Either I'd cooked
too much or the food I'd ordered was just a bit too large, or whatever.
I'm sure many of you are familiar with the feeling of having four bites of food left,
wanting roughly one more bite, but knowing that three bites is too few to justify
saving the food for later.
(Then you either apply lots of willpower to save the food for later, or you take another
bite, realize that there isn't enough food left to save, and proceed to stuﬀ yourself.)
This is pretty much a standard instance of the sunk cost fallacy, where reasoning of
the form "I can't just not eat the food, because I already paid for it" neglects the fact
that the costs are already sunk. In these scenarios, the only consideration should be
whether or not eating the rest of the food is be better than throwing it away. Your
money, which is gone no matter what you choose, shouldn't factor into the decision.
As a student of economics, I understood the sunk cost fallacy well. But extra food
didn't quite seem sunk: after all, the food would still give me more calories, and even
if it made me overfull for an hour or two, it could lead me to have smaller (and thus
cheaper) subsequent meals.
Or, at least, that's the argument that my internal monologue would spin up to distract
me long enough for my hands to keep shoving food into my mouth.
The counterargument would go something like
First of all, many of the calories will be either wasted or harmful if I consume them
now. Secondly, the cost of dinner is more dependent upon what's available than
how hungry I am. Third, even if the cost of dinner is reduced, it will be reduced by
maybe a dollar, and a few hours of discomfort is not worth a dollar.
But by then, it would already be too late; the food would be gone and I'd be overfull.
2
Failures of this form can generally be ﬁxed by "just not doing that," which in this case
entails forcing yourself to stop eating. I don't like that solution, as it requires an
application of willpower, and in general, any solution that requires an application of
willpower is a stopgap, not a remedy. I much prefer solutions that get all of myself
onto the same page, including the parts that make distracting arguments so they can
shovel more food into my mouth while I'm not looking.

(A problem isn't solved until it's solved automatically, without need for attention or
willpower.)
The way I solved this problem was by committing to save any amount of leftover food,
no matter how small. Two bites left? Screw it, get me a take-out box.
Committing to this, and actually doing it once or twice to show myself that I mean
business, had an interesting eﬀect.
First of all, it had the obvious eﬀects that I stopped stuﬃng myself and that I
occasionally had three-bite snacks available in the fridge.
But more importantly, credibly committing (to myself) that I would do the right thing
even if it seemed too late made it much easier to automatically do the right thing.
Roughly speaking, I managed to signal to the part of myself that was worried about
food scarcity that it didn't need to distract me in order to squirrel food away, because I
would actually listen to it. I showed it that I was on its side, via an unﬂinching
willingness to save food (even one or two bites) with a blatant disregard for social
norms and weird looks from confused waiters.
And this, in turn, got that part of me onto my side. A willingness (and demonstrated
ability) to save any amount of food no matter how small eliminated the impetus to
keep eating when near full. This, in turn, allowed me to actually look at the remaining
food and (armed with more experience about which tiny portions of food are actually
appreciated later) and decide whether or not to save it.
These days, my bar for how little food I'm willing to take home is quite low, but I'm
also comfortable throwing food out (if I'm in a rush or if it won't keep well), and I no
longer get the feeling that I'm trying to distract myself for long enough to do
something that I wouldn't approve of.
3
I occasionally see people hitting the failure mode where they try to apply willpower in
order to do a thing (such as only eat half of their sandwich, and save the other half for
later) and then fail slightly (such as by taking a bite out of the second half) at which
point they proceed to completely ignore the parts of themselves that suggest restraint
(such as by eating the entire second half of the sandwich and thereby stuﬃng
themselves).
I refer to this failure mode as "failing with abandon." It seems to me that it's at least
somewhat related to a failure of self-signalling: once the initial target is missed, the
target itself is completely discredited and ignored in favor of total indulgence.
The technique I'm describing — self-signalling an ability to do the right thing even if it
seems too late — can address this failure mode in general.
People might feel strange saving the second half of the sandwich after they've taken
two bites out of it, but if you actually do that a few times then it becomes much easier
to believe that you can. The narrative shifts from "well I guess I'm not saving the
second half of this sandwich" to "I guess I was hungry enough for two more bites, but
now I'll save the rest."

As it turns out, you can do the right thing after missing the initial target! Just promise
yourself that you'll allow yourself to do the right thing, no matter how late.
4
There's a certain amount of self-trust that comes from making and honoring
commitments to do what you want to do even after it's "too late" or "no longer worth
it." For me, this entails a certain amount of self-loyalty: I'm willing to accept strange
looks from waiters in order to save small amounts of food because I'm more loyal to
the part of me that is possessive about food than I am to the social norms.
(I expect this is much easier above a certain conﬁdence threshold, such that others
say you are "eccentric" rather than "a weirdo." Your mileage may vary. But don't take
that as an excuse; I still strongly encourage you to show yourself that you are able to
do the right thing even after it's "too late".)
I have found that there is signiﬁcant power in signalling to myself that I'm willing and
able to do the thing that I want to do, no matter how futile it may seem; that I'm
willing to get as close to the target as possible even if I've already missed it. This
prevents me from the impulse to "fail with abandon" in the ﬁrst place.
5
This technique is one facet of a more general mindset that I ﬁnd quite useful, which is
that of "loyalty to the self." I'll touch upon that general mindstate more next week.

Productivity through self-loyalty
1
I can be pretty dang productive when I put my mind to it.
Many people have a generic mind-model which runs roughly as follows: a person's reported
desires are but one voice among the thronging mob of forces that govern the brain, and it
takes signiﬁcant eﬀort and force of will to align the mob for long enough for people to get
something done. Many of us have experienced a desire to stop procrastinating, and then
have watched helplessly as we continue to surf the internet. Many of us have resolved to do
something diﬃcult, only to watch the opportunity ﬂit by us as we stand motionless at the
sidelines.
People use something like this model when they speak of akrasia, the tendency to act
against your own better judgement. Haidt analogizes the brain to someone riding an
elephant, where the conscious mind is a rider struggling to steer. Kahneman writes of a
dichotomy between "fast," emotional, immediate processes that govern most of our thinking,
and "slow," deliberate, conscious processes that occasionally assume command. I have
found that the "spoon theory" model of energy reserves resonates for many people, even
those who aren't chronically ill or otherwise disabled.
In all these models, there is a tendency to separate the voice from the mob. Insofar as the
voice has the ability to direct the mob (steer the elephant, convince system 1, etc.), we get
to do what we want. But when the mob loses interest or focus or motivation, we are at it's
leisure.
I ﬁnd a lot of truth in these models, and so do many others. Thus, many people, upon seeing
my high levels of productivity, expect that I must be very very good at keeping tight control

over the mental mob, and forcing them to do things that they would rather not do. It's not
uncommon for people to remark that I need to be careful about strong-arming the mob (as
eventually they rebel, leading to burn-out), or for people to tell me that I must have some
sort of iron will (which they cannot replicate).
I don't think this is the case. As I said last time:
A problem isn't solved until it's solved automatically, without need for attention or
willpower.
It's possible to force the mob to do something, and this is why willpower is often useful in the
short term. But it's seldom a good idea to try to force yourself to do things the mob doesn't
want to do in the long term. Ultimately, the mob is the one actually managing your
motivation systems, and any plan that relies upon a permanent use of mental force is
unlikely to succeed.
It is much better to have the mob on the same side as the voice of reason.
But this is something of a catch 22: many people have mind-mobs that just want to sit
around all day and watch TV shows or surf the internet. If your mind-mob just wants to rest
and I'm cautioning against force, then how does one ever attain high levels of productivity?
My answer is complex, and relies upon many tools. I've discussed a few of them in the past,
and today I'll discuss another.
2
First, a word of warning: remember the law of equal and opposite advice. For every piece of
advice useful to one person, there is some other person who needs exactly the opposite
advice.
I am going to discuss a technique that I use for productivity which results in a sense of
austerity through compassion/camaraderie: the parts of me that need rest take as much rest
as they need, but also try to take as little as they need out of awareness of the scarcity of
resources and compassion for the other parts of me.
This has proved a powerful technique for me, but it may be exactly the wrong tool for many
others. The goal is not to guilt-trip the parts of you that need extra rest, and the goal is not
to give yourself over to self-indulgent whims. I personally ﬁnd a lot of power somewhere in
between, at "compasionate austerity," but many others may react poorly to any internal
narrative of scarce resources and mental frugality. Remember the law of equal and opposite
advice.
3
Imagine a student who has been assigned a very important bit of homework with a deadline
looming ever closer. Let's say they're trying to kick themselves into high productivity mode.
How can they do this? Well, they can pull out the whips and cattle prods and force their
mind-mob to be productive (with gritted teeth and building malcontent), or they can use
their most desperate voice and plead with themselves, promising rewards for good behavior
(that the mob might just take anyway, if it suits them), or they can wait until the deadline is
so close that even the short-sighted mob can see it, at which point they'll go into panic mode
(which is kinda like high productivity mode, if you squint).
But there's also a fourth option, which is something like "gain the trust of the mob, and build
rapport." If the student gets the mob onto their side, then the paper will be done

automatically, no willpower or pleading or panic necessary. This obviously sounds nice, but
how is it done?
I do this, at least in part, by showing the mob that I am on their side ﬁrst. This involves self-
signalling, as discussed in last week's post. Speciﬁcally, it involves signaling to yourself that
you are loyal to the mob.
Sometimes, the mob in you will make demands that sound unreasonable, such as "cancel
everything today, I need a break." In these situations, it's easy to try to force or plea or
bargain with yourself. I take a diﬀerent tactic: I ask myself if this is really what I need, and if
it is, then I do it.
I show the mob that I respect its demands, and that I'm on its side. After all, we have the
same goals; and furthermore, I am not the king in my mind. I do not desire a ﬁght (and if I
did, I wouldn't win it).
There are some really bad ways to do this (remember the law of equal and opposite advice!),
and if you do this incorrectly it may lead to destructive self-indulgence. If your voice of
reason signals helplessness in the face of the mob's whims, if it gives itself up to the mob,
then you might end up unhappily pursuing short-sighted whims. The trick is to signal respect
for the mob instead: what my mind reports it needs, it gets. This—an unﬂinching willingness
to get the mob what it wants—tempers the mob's demands.
The appropriate sentiment can perhaps best be described by this clip from the ﬁlm It's a
Wonderful Life:
(start at 2:58, watch through 6:26)
4
This scene portrays a bank run during the beginning of the great depression. It features the
protagonist, George Bailey, trying to calm down a worried mob by reminding them that
they're all in this crisis together. The mob doesn't really go for it, and he ends up using his
honeymoon money to keep the bank alive.
The ﬁrst member of the mob to get his money out of the bank demands the full value of his
account, $242. George pleads for austerity, reminding him that they're all in this together,
but Tom still demands all his money. George doesn't protest or argue, he just nods and pays
out Tom's entire account (and then extends the man a little extra compassion, to boot). The
next two members of the mob say they can get away with $20, and are starting to express
some concern for George using his own money for this. Then Mrs. Davis bids lower, asking
for only $17.50. Overcome, George gives her a kiss on the cheek.
This is the sort of relationship—between George Bailey and the mob—that I have the "voice
of reason" cultivate with the varied and disparate parts of my mind. When some part of me
demands that I pay its full account, I'll ask it once how much it needs, but if it still demands

its full account I'll pay up without hesitation (and extend some additional compassion). This
is done not in an appeasing way, but it a respectful way: we're all in this together.
The mob understands that the voice of reason is responsible for many of the good outcomes
that I've achieved, and the mob understands that things like "rest" and "relaxation" and
"procrastination" are expensive in terms of ability to achieve good outcomes—I'm "paying
out of the honeymoon money."
But the voice of reason, in turn, is willing to pay out of its honeymoon money. It knows that
everyone is going to need some resources to make it through, and does not begrudge any
part of me for that.
There are two important components to this sort of self-relationship: First, the mob must
respect the voice of reason, by understanding that the voice of reason achieves many nice
things, such as food and roofs and clever schemes and so on. Second, the mob must know
that the voice of reason is loyal to them. When some mind part does demand something
ostentatious, such as "a few days of doing nothing," then the voice of reason is willing to
acquire it.
My loyalty is not to any individual appointment or task. My own mental health is among my
top priorities.
Once the mob sees this, once the mob knows that I will move the heavens and the earth in
order to meet its needs, it doesn't tend to demand the full account. Because, in fact, the mob
respects the scarcity of scarce resources, it wants the voice of reason to have enough
ﬂexibility to keep on achieving good outcomes. Done right, the mob enters a sort of
camaraderie where it takes as little as it can out of compassion, because we all know that life
can be hard.
When Mrs. Davis leaves that bank with $17.50, she isn't feeling resentment or smugness.
She knows that she's going to have to struggle a bit to live on only $17.50 until the bank re-
opens, but she isn't dreading the struggle or muttering curses. No, she goes home ﬁlled with
compassion, with respect for George Bailey who is taking great pains to get everyone
through this crisis together, and with a tighter feeling of community and closeness to those
around her enduring similar austerity. She goes home happy and warm.
5
This is the mindstate in which I attain high productivity: various parts of the mob of my mind
occasionally need rest, recuperation, and procrastination. Parts of me ask for these things.
When they do, I ask them how much they really need, how much they can get by with. Do I
actually need to take four days oﬀ? Because I will, but it's expensive.
Often, when a part of me really needs a break, and throws up its hands feeling overwhelmed,
its initial demands are unrealistic—"two weeks with no responsibilities!" So then I ask it
again, with the demeanor of George Bailey, what it really needs to get by. And that part of
me quickly remembers that all of me is in this together, and that I'm trying to do some very
diﬃcult things, and that all parts of me are constrained by scarce resources. Then the part
that protested searches for what it really needs, the bare minimum, and it usually answers
something like "I can get the rest I need in ﬁfteen minutes."
And this sacriﬁce can leave me feeling stronger, feeling warmth and compassion and self-
camaraderie, the same feeling that spurs George Bailey to kiss Mrs. Davis' cheek in the
video clip above.
6

There is only so much time and attention that we have in this world, and we're trying to do
many amazing and wonderful things. If you want to be able to do more than you're currently
doing, I don't suggest trying to force yourself. Instead, I suggest showing yourself that you
really are willing to move the heaven and earth for yourself, in order to satisfy your needs.
This, in turn, can help you build up the mental camaraderie (and resulting austerity) that
comes from all the parts of you understanding that you're all in this together.

Conclusion of the Replacing Guilt
series
This is a linkpost for https://mindingourway.com/guilt-conclusion/
Today marks the end of my series on replacing guilt (table of contents).
I began the series by discussing the "restless guilt," that people feel when some part
of them thinks they aren't doing what's important. I argued that it's possible to care
about things outside yourself, and things larger than yourself, no matter what a
nihilist tells you.
In the second arc of the series I implored readers to drop their obligations and ask
themselves where they would put their eﬀorts if there was nothing they felt they
"should" be doing. If you can drop your sense of obligation and still care hard for
something larger than yourself, you are well on your way to dispensing with guilt-
based motivation.
In the third arc, I described techniques for building and maintaining a powerful
intrinsic drive without the need to spur yourself with guilt. I point out that working
yourself ragged is not a virtue, and that the "work too hard then rest a long time"
narrative is a dangerous narrative. We can't always act as we wish we could: We're
not yet gods, and it's often easier to change our behavior by exploring obstacles with
experimentation and creativity instead of attempting to berate and guilt ourselves
into submission. I plea for self compassion and argue that there are no "bad people".
In the fourth arc, I describe ways to draw on the fact that the world around you is
broken as fuel for your intrinsic drive. If, when given the choice between "bad" and
"worse" you can choose "bad" without suﬀering; if you can be content in your gambles
while having no excuses and coming to terms with the fact that you may fail, then it
becomes easy to transmute your guilt into resolve and struggle hard to make the
future as bright as you can make it.
In the ﬁfth and ﬁnal arc, I describe mindsets and mental stances from which guilt
seems an alien concept. Primary among them are "conﬁdence all the way up", the skill
of believing in your capabilities while not being overly sure of anything; and desperate
recklessness deﬁance, the three dubious virtues of those with strong intrinsic drive.
I conclude with a few words on how we will be measured: When all is said and done,
Nature will not judge us by our actions; we will be measured only by what actually
happens. Our goal, in the end, is to ensure that the timeless history of our universe is
one that is ﬁlled with whatever it is we're ﬁghting for. For me, at least, this is the
underlying driver that takes the place of guilt: Once we have learned our lessons from
the past, there is no reason to wrack ourselves with guilt. All we need to do, in any
given moment, is look upon the actions available to us, consider, and take whichever
one seems most likely to lead to a future full of light.

