
The Science of Winning at Life
1. Scientiﬁc Self-Help: The State of Our Knowledge
2. How to Beat Procrastination
3. My Algorithm for Beating Procrastination
4. How to Be Happy
5. The Good News of Situationist Psychology
6. The Power of Reinforcement
7. Rational Romantic Relationships, Part 1: Relationship Styles and Attraction Basics

Scientiﬁc Self-Help: The State of Our
Knowledge
Part of the sequence: The Science of Winning at Life
Some have suggested that the Less Wrong community could improve readers'
instrumental rationality more eﬀectively if it ﬁrst caught up with the scientiﬁc
literature on productivity and self-help, and then enabled readers to deliberately
practice self-help skills and apply what they've learned in real life.
I think that's a good idea. My contribution today is a quick overview of scientiﬁc self-
help: what professionals call "the psychology of adjustment." First I'll review the state
of the industry and the scientiﬁc literature, and then I'll brieﬂy summarize the
scientiﬁc data available on three topics in self-help: study methods, productivity, and
happiness.
The industry and the literature
As you probably know, much of the self-help industry is a sham, ripe for parody. Most
self-help books are written to sell, not to help. Pop psychology may be more myth than
fact. As Christopher Buckley (1999) writes, "The more people read [self-help books],
the more they think they need them... [it's] more like an addiction than an alliance."
Where can you turn for reliable, empirically-based self-help advice? A few leading
therapeutic psychologists (e.g., Albert Ellis, Arnold Lazarus, Martin Seligman) have
written self-help books based on decades of research, but even these works tend to
give recommendations that are still debated, because they aren't yet part of
settled science.
Lifelong self-help researcher Clayton Tucker-Ladd wrote and updated Psychological
Self-Help (pdf) over several decades. It's a summary of what scientists do and don't
know about self-help methods (as of about 2003), but it's also more than 2,000 pages
long, and much of it surveys scientiﬁc opinion rather than experimental results,
because on many subjects there aren't any experimental results yet. The book is
associated with an internet community of people sharing what does and doesn't work
for them.
More immediately useful is Richard Wiseman's 59 Seconds. Wiseman is an
experimental psychologist and paranormal investigator who gathered together what
little self-help research is part of settled science, and put it into a short, fun, and
useful Malcolm Gladwell-ish book. The next best popular-level general self-help book is
perhaps Martin Seligman's What You Can Change and What You Can't.
Two large books rate hundreds of popular self-help books according to what
professional psychologists think of them, and oﬀer advice on how to choose self-help
books. Unfortunately, this may not mean much because even professional
psychologists very often have opinions that depart from the empirical data, as
documented extensively by Scott Lilienfeld and others in Science and Pseudoscience
in Clinical Psychology and Navigating the Mindﬁeld. These two books are helpful in
assessing what is and isn't known according to empirical research (rather than

according to expert opinion). Lilienfeld also edits the useful journal Scientiﬁc Review of
Mental Health Practice, and has compiled a list of harmful psychological treatments.
Also see Nathan and Gorman's A Guide to Treatments That Work, Roth & Fonagy's
What Works for Whom?, and, more generally, Stanovich's How to Think Straight about
Psychology.
Many self-help books are written as "one size ﬁts all," but of course this is rarely
appropriate in psychology, and this leads to reader disappointment (Norem & Chang,
2000). But psychologists have tested the eﬀectiveness of reading particular problem-
focused self-help books ("bibliotherapy").1 For example, it appears that reading David
Burns' Feeling Good can be as eﬀective for treating depression as individual or group
therapy. Results vary from book to book.
There are at least four university textbooks that teach basic scientiﬁc self-help. The
ﬁrst is Weiten, Dunn, and Hammer's Psychology Applied to Modern Life: Adjustment in
the 21st Century. It's expensive, but you can preview it here. Others are are
Santrock's Human Adjustment, Duﬀy et al.'s Psychology for Living, and Nevid &
Rathus' Psychology and the Challenges of Life.
If you read only one book of self-help in your life, I recommend Weiten, Dunn, and
Hammer's Psychology Applied to Modern Life.2 Unfortunately, like Tucker-
Ladd's Psychological Self-Help, many sections of the book are an overview of scientiﬁc
opinion rather than experimental result, because so few experimental studies on the
subject have been done!
In private correspondance with me, Weiten remarked:
You are looking for substance in what is ultimately a black hole of empirical
research ...Basically, almost everything written on the topic emphasizes the
complete lack of evidence.
Perhaps I am overly cynical, but I suspect that empirical tests are nonexistent
because the authors of self-help and time-management titles are not at all
conﬁdent that the results would be favorable. Hence, they have no incentive to
pursue such research because it is likely to undermine their sales and their ability
to write their next book. Another issue is that many of the authors who crank out
these titles have little or no background in research. In a less cynical vein, another
issue is that this research would come with all the formidable complexities of the
research evaluating the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent approaches to therapy. Eﬃcacy
trials for therapies are extremely diﬃcult to conduct in a clean fashion and
because of these complexities require big bucks in the way of grants.
Other leading researchers in the psychology of adjustment expressed much the same
opinion of the ﬁeld when I contacted them.
 
A sampling of scientiﬁc self-help advice
Still, perhaps scientiﬁc psychology can oﬀer some useful self-help advice. I'll focus on
two areas of particular interest to the Less Wrong community
- studying and productivity - and on one area of general interest: happiness.
 

Study methods
Organize for clarity the information you want to learn, for example in an outline
(Einstein & McDaniel 2004; Tigner 1999; McDaniel et al. 1996). Cramming doesn't
work (Wong 2006). Set up a schedule for studying (Allgood et al. 2000). Test yourself
on the material (Karpicke & Roediger 2003; Roediger & Karpicke 2006a; Roediger &
Karpicke 2006b; Agarwal et al. 2008; Butler & Roediger 2008), and do so repeatedly,
with 24 hours or more between study sessions (Rohrer & Taylor 2006; Seabrook et al
2005; Cepeda et al. 2006; Rohrer et al. 2005; Karpicke & Roediger 2007). Basically:
use Anki.
To retain studied information more eﬀectively, try acrostics (Hermann et al. 2002), the
link method (Iaccino 1996; Worthen 1997); and the method of loci (Massen &
Vaterrodt-Plunnecke 2006; Moe & De Beni 2004; Moe & De Beni 2005).
 
Productivity
Unfortunately, there have been fewer experimental studies on eﬀective productivity
and time management methods than there have been on eﬀective study methods. For
an overview of scientiﬁc opinion on productivity, I recommend pages 121-126 of
Psychology Applied to Modern Life. According to those pages, common advice from
professionals includes:
1. Doing the right tasks is more important than doing your tasks eﬃciently. In fact,
too much concern for eﬃciency is a leading cause of procrastination. Say "no"
more often, and use your time for tasks that really matter.
2. Delegate responsibility as often as possible. Throw away unimportant tasks and
items.
3. Keep a record of your time use. (Quantiﬁed Self can help.)
4. Write down your goals. Break them down into smaller goals, and break these
into manageable tasks. Schedule these tasks into your calendar.
5. Process notes and emails only once. Tackle one task at a time, and group similar
tasks together.
6. Make use of your downtime (plane rides, bus rides, doctor's oﬃce waitings).
These days, many of your tasks can be completed on your smartphone.
Why the dearth of experimental research on productivity? A leading researcher on the
topic, Piers Steel, explained to me in personal communication:
Fields tend to progress from description to experimentation, and the
procrastination ﬁeld is just starting to move towards that direction. There really
isn't very much directly done on procrastination, but there is more for the broader
ﬁeld of self-regulation... it should transfer as the fundamentals are the same. For
example, I would bet everything I own that goal setting works, as there [are]
about [a thousand studies] on it in the motivational ﬁeld (just not speciﬁcally on
procrastination). On the other hand, we are building a behavioral lab so we can
test many of these techniques head to head, something that sorely needs to be
done.
Steel's book on the subject is The Procrastination Equation, which I highly recommend.
 

Happiness
There is an abundance of research on factors that correlate with subjective well-being
(individuals' own assessments of their happiness and life satisfaction).
Factors that don't correlate much with happiness include: age,3 gender,4 parenthood,5
intelligence,6 physical attractiveness,7 and money8 (as long as you're above the
poverty line). Factors that correlate moderately with happiness include: health,9 social
activity,10 and religiosity.11 Factors that correlate strongly with happiness include:
genetics,12 love and relationship satisfaction,13 and work satisfaction.14
For many of these factors, a causal link to happiness has also been demonstrated with
some conﬁdence, but that story is too complicated to tell in this short article.
 
Conclusions
Many compassionate professionals have modeled their careers after George Miller's
(1969) call to "give psychology away" to the masses as a means of promoting human
welfare. As a result, hundreds of experimental studies have been done to test which
self-help methods work, and which do not. We humans can use this knowledge to
achieve our goals.
But much work remains to be done. Many features of human psychology and behavior
are not well-understood, and many self-help methods recommended by popular and
academic authors have not yet been experimentally tested. If you are considering
psychology research as a career path, and you want to (1) improve human welfare, (2)
get research funding, (3) explore an under-developed area of research, and (4) have
the chance to write a best-selling self-help book once you've done some of your
research, then please consider a career of experimentally testing diﬀerent self-help
methods. Humanity will thank you for it.
 
Next post: How to Beat Procrastination
 
 
Notes
1 Read a nice overview of the literature in Bergsma, "Do Self-Help Books Help?" (2008).
2 I recommend the 10th edition, which has large improvements over the 9th edition, including 4500 new citations.
3 Age and happiness are unrelated (Lykken 1999), age accounting for less than 1% of the variation in people's
happiness (Inglehart 1990; Myers & Diener 1997).
4 Despite being treated for depressive disorders twice as often as men (Nolen-Hoeksema 2002), women report just
as high levels of well-being as men do (Myers 1992).
5 Apparently, the joys and stresses of parenthood balance each other out, as people with and without children are
equally happy (Argyle 2001).

6 Both IQ and educational attainment appear to be unrelated to happiness (Diener et al. 2009; Ross & Van Willigen
1997).
7 Good-looking people enjoy huge advantages, but do not report greater happiness than others (Diener et al.
1995).
8 The correlation between income and happiness is surprisingly weak (Diener & Seligman 2004; Diener et al. 1993;
Johnson & Krueger 2006). One problem may be that higher income contributes to greater materialism, which
impedes happiness (Frey & Stutzer 2002; Kasser et al. 2004; Solberg et al. 2002; Kasser 2002; Van Boven 2005;
Nickerson et al. 2003; Kahneman et al. 2006).
9 Those with disabling health conditions are happier than you might think (Myers 1992; Riis et al. 2005; Argyle
1999).
10 Those who are satisﬁed with their social life are moderately more happy than others (Diener & Seligman 2004;
Myers 1999; Diener & Seligman 2002).
11 Religiosity correlates with happiness (Abdel-Kahlek 2005; Myers 2008), though it may be religious attendance
and not religious belief that matters (Chida et al. 2009).
12 Past happiness is the best predictor of future happiness (Lucas & Diener 2008). Happiness is surprisingly
unmoved by external factors (Lykken & Tellegen 1996), because the genetics accounts for about 50% of the
variance in happiness (Lyubomirsky et al. 2005; Stubbe et al. 2005).
13 Married people are happier than those who are single or divorced (Myers & Diener 1995; Diener et al. 2000), and
marital satisfaction predicts happiness (Proulx et al. 2007).
14 Unemployment makes people very unhappy (Argyle 2001), and job satisfaction is strongly correlated with
happiness (Judge & Klinger 2008; Warr 1999).
 
References
Abdel-Khalek (2006). "Happiness, health, and religiosity: Signiﬁcant relations." Mental Health, 9(1): 85-97.
Agarwal, Karpicke, Kang, Roediger, & McDermott (2008). "Examining the testing eﬀect with open- and closed-book
tests." Applied Cognitive Psychology, 22: 861-876.
Allgood, Risko, Alvarez, & Fairbanks (2000). "Factors that inﬂuence study." In Flippo & Caverly, (Eds.), Handbook of
college reading and study strategy research. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Argyle (1999). "Causes and correlates of happiness." In Kahneman, Diener, & Schwartz (Eds.), Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology. New York: Sage.
Argyle (2001). The Psychology of Happiness (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Buckley (1998). God is My Broker: A Monk-Tycoon Reveals the 7 1/2 Laws of Spiritual and Financial Growth. New
York: Random House.
Butler & Roediger (2008). "Feedback enhances the positive eﬀects and reduces the negative eﬀects of multiple-
choice testing." Memory & Cognition, 36(3).
Chida, Steptoe, & Powell (2009). "Religiosity/Spirituality and Mortality." Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 78(2):
81-90.
Cepeda, Pashler, Vul, Wixted, & Rohrer (2006). "Distributed practice in verbal recall tasks: A review and
quantitative synthesis." Psychological Bulletin, 132: 354-380.
Diener, Sandvik, Seidlitz, & Diener (1993). "The relationship between income and subjective well-being: Relative or
absolute?" Social Indicators Research, 28: 195-223.
Diener, Wolsic, & Fujita (1995). "Physical attractiveness and subjective well-being." Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69: 120-129.

Diener, Gohm, Suh, & Oishi (2000). "Similarity of the relations between marital status and subjective well-being
across cultures." Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 31: 419-436.
Diener & Seligman (2002). "Very happy people." Psychological Science, 13: 80-83.
Diener & Seligman (2004). "Beyond money: Toward an economy of well-being." Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 5(1): 1-31.
Diener, Kesebir, & Tov (2009). "Happiness" In Leary & Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of Individual Diﬀerences in Social
Behavior (pp. 147-160). New York: Guilford.
Einstein & McDaniel (2004). Memory Fitness: A Guide for Successful Aging. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Frey & Stutzer (2002). "What can economists learn from happiness research?" Journal of Economic Literature, 40:
402-435.
Hermann, Raybeck, & Gruneberg (2002). Improving memory and study skills: Advances in theory and
practice. Ashland, OH: Hogrefe & Huber.
Iaccino (1996). "A further examination of the bizarre imagery mnemonic: Its eﬀectiveness with mixed context and
delayed testing. Perceptual & Motor Skills, 83: 881-882.
Inglehart (1990). Culture shift in advanced industrial society. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Johnson & Krueger (2006). "How money buys happiness: Genetic and environmental processes linking ﬁnances and
life satisfaction." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90: 680-691.
Judge & Klinger (2008). "Job satisfaction: Subjective well-being at work." In Eid & Larsen (Eds.), The science of
subjective well-being (pp. 393-413). New York: Guilford.
Kahneman, Krueger, Schkade, Schwarz, & Stone (2006). "Would you be happier if you were richer? A focusing
illusion." Science, 312: 1908-1910.
Kasser (2002). The high prices of materialism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kasser, Ryan, Couchman, & Sheldon (2004). "Materialistic values: Their causes and consequences." In Kasser &
Kanner (Eds.), Psychology and consumer culture: The struggle for a good life in a materialistic world. Washington
DC: American Psychological Association.
Karpicke & Roediger (2003). "The critical importance of retrieval for learning." Science, 319: 966-968. 
Karpicke & Roediger (2007). "Expanding retrieval practice promotes short-term retention, but equally spaced
retrieval enhances long-term retention." Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
33(4): 704-719.
Lucas & Diener (2008). "Personality and subjective well-being." In John, Robins, & Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of
personality: Theory and research (pp. 796-814). New York: Guilford.
Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, & Schkade (2005). "Pursuing happiness: The architecture of sustainable change." Review of
General Psychology, 9(2), 111-131.
Lykken & Tellegen (1996). "Happiness is a stochastic phenomenon." Psychological Science, 7: 186-189.
Lykken (1999). Happiness: The nature and nurture of joy and contentment. New York: St. Martin's.
Massen & Vaterrodt-Plunnecke (2006). "The role of proactive interference in mnemonic techniques." Memory, 14:
189-196.
McDaniel, Waddill, & Shakesby (1996). "Study strategies, interest, and learning from Text: The application of
material appropriate processing." In Herrmann, McEvoy, Hertzog, Hertel, & Johnson (Eds.), Basic and applied
memory research: Theory in context (Vol 1). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Miller (1969). "On turning psychology over to the unwashed." Psychology Today, 3(7), 53-54, 66-68, 70, 72, 74.
Moe & De Beni (2004). "Studying passages with the loci method: Are subject-generated more eﬀective than
experimenter-supplied loci?" Journal of Mental Imagery, 28(3-4): 75-86.

Moe & De Beni (2005). "Stressing the eﬃcacy of the Loci method: oral presentation and the subject-generation of
the Loci pathway with expository passages." Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(1): 95-106.
Myers (1992). The pursuit of happiness: Who is happy, and why. New York: Morrow.
Myers & Diener (1995). "Who is happy?" Psychological Science, 6: 10-19.
Myers & Diener (1997). "The pursuit of happiness." Scientiﬁc American, Special Issue 7: 40-43.
Myers (1999). "Close relationships and quality of life." In Kahnemann, Diener, & Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology. New York: Sage.
Myers (2008). "Religion and human ﬂourishing." In Eid & Larsen (Eds.), The science of subjective well-being (pp.
323-346). New York: Guilford.
Nickerson, Schwartz, Diener, & Kahnemann (2003). "Zeroing in on the dark side of the American dream: A closer
look at the negative consequences of the goal for ﬁnancial success." Psychological Science, 14(6): 531-536.
Nolen-Hoeksema (2002). "Gender diﬀerences in depression." In Gotlib & Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression.
New York: Guilford.
Proulx, Helms, & Cheryl (2007). "Marital quality and personal well-being: A Meta-analysis." Journal of Marriage and
Family, 69: 576-593.
Roediger & Karpicke (2006a). "Test-enhanced learning: Taking memory tests improves long-term
retention." Psychological Science, 17: 249-255.
Roediger & Karpicke (2006b). "The power of testing memory: Basic research and implications for educational
practice." Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1(3): 181-210.
Riis, Loewenstein, Baron, Jepson, Fagerlin, & Ubel (2005). "Ignorance of hedonic adaptation to hemodialysis: A
study using ecological momentary assessment." Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134: 3-9.
Rohrer & Taylor (2006). "The eﬀects of over-learning and distributed practice on the retention of mathematics
knowlege. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20: 1209-1224. 
Rohrer, Taylor, Pashler, Wixted, & Cepeda (2005). "The Eﬀect of Overlearning on Long-Term Retention." Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 19: 361-374.
Ross & Van Willigen (1997). "Education and the subjective quality of life." Journal of Health & Social Behavior, 38:
275-297.
Seabrook, Brown, & Solity (2005). "Distributed and massed practice: From laboratory to class-room." Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 19(1): 107-122.
Solberg, Diener, Wirtz, Lucas, & Oishi (2002). "Wanting, having, and satisfaction: Examining the role of desire
discrepancies in satisfaction with income." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(3): 725-734.
Stubbe, Posthuma, Boomsa, & De Geus (2005). "Heritability and life satisfaction in adults: A twin-family study."
Psychological Medicine, 35: 1581-1588.
Tigner (1999). "Putting memory research to good use: Hints from cognitive psychology." College Teaching, 47(4):
149-151.
Van Boven (2005). "Experientialism, materialism, and the pursuit of happiness." Review of General Psychology,
9(2): 132-142.
Warr (1999). "Well-being and the workplace." In Kahneman, Diener, & Schwartz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations
of hedonic psychology. New York: Sage.
Wong (2006). Essential Study Skills. Boston: Houghton Miﬄin.
Worthen (1997). "Resiliency of bizarreness eﬀects under varying conditions of verbal and imaginal elaboration and
list composition. Journal of Mental Imagery, 21: 167-194.

How to Beat Procrastination
Part of the sequence: The Science of Winning at Life
 
My own behavior baﬄes me. I ﬁnd myself doing what I hate, and not doing what I really
want to do!
- Saint Paul (Romans 7:15)
Once you're trained in BayesCraft, it may be tempting to tackle classic problems "from
scratch" with your new Rationality Powers. But often, it's more eﬀective to do a bit of
scholarship ﬁrst and at least start from the state of our scientiﬁc knowledge on the subject.
Today, I want to tackle procrastination by summarizing what we know about it, and how to
overcome it.
Let me begin with three character vignettes...
Eddie attended the sales seminar, read all the books, and repeated the self-aﬃrmations in
the mirror this morning. But he has yet to make his ﬁrst sale. Rejection after rejection has
demoralized him. He organizes his desk, surfs the internet, and puts oﬀ his cold calls until
potential clients are leaving for the day.
Three blocks away, Valerie stares at a blank document in Microsoft Word. Her essay
assignment on municipal politics, due tomorrow, is mind-numbingly dull. She decides she
needs a break, texts some friends, watches a show, and ﬁnds herself even less motivated to
write the paper than before. At 10pm she dives in, but the result reﬂects the time she put
into it: it's terrible.
In the next apartment down, Tom is ahead of the game. He got his visa, bought his plane
tickets, and booked time oﬀ for his vacation to the Dominican Republic. He still needs to
reserve a hotel room, but that can be done anytime. Tom keeps pushing the task forward a
week as he has more urgent things to do, and then forgets about it altogether. As he's
packing, he remembers to book the room, but by now there are none left by the beach.
When he arrives, he ﬁnds his room is 10 blocks from the beach and decorated with dead
mosquitos.
Eddie, Valerie, and Tom are all procrastinators, but in diﬀerent ways.1
Eddie's problem is low expectancy. By now, he expects only failure. Eddie has low
expectancy of success from making his next round of cold calls. Results from 39
procrastination studies show that low expectancy is a major cause of procrastination.2 You
doubt your ability to follow through with the diet. You don't expect to get the job. You really
should be going out and meeting girls and learning to ﬂirt better, but you expect only
rejection now, so you procrastinate. You have learned to be helpless.
Valerie's problem is that her task has low value for her. We all put oﬀ what we dislike.3 It's
easy to meet up with your friends for drinks or start playing a videogame; not so easy to
start doing your taxes. This point may be obvious, but it's nice to see it conﬁrmed in over a
dozen scientiﬁc studies. We put oﬀ things we don't like to do.
But the strongest predictor of procrastination is Tom's problem: impulsiveness. It would have
been easy for Tom to book the hotel in advance, but he kept getting distracted by more
urgent or interesting things, and didn't remember to book the hotel until the last minute,

which left him with a poor selection of rooms. Dozens of studies have shown that
procrastination is closely tied to impulsiveness.4
Impulsiveness ﬁts into a broader component of procrastination: time. An event's impact on
our decisions decreases as its temporal distance from us increases.5 We are less motivated
by delayed rewards than by immediate rewards, and the more impulsive you are, the more
your motivation is aﬀected by such delays.
Expectancy, value, delay, and impulsiveness are the four major components of
procrastination. Piers Steel, a leading researcher on procrastination, explains:
Decrease the certainty or the size of a task's reward - its expectancy or its value - and
you are unlikely to pursue its completion with any vigor. Increase the delay for the task's
reward and our susceptibility to delay - impulsiveness - and motivation also dips.
 
The Procrastination Equation
This leaves us with "the procrastination equation":
Though we are always learning more, the procrastination equation accounts for every major
ﬁnding on procrastination, and draws upon our best current theories of motivation.6
Increase the size of a task's reward (including both the pleasantness of doing the task and
the value of its after-eﬀects), and your motivation goes up. Increase the perceived odds of
getting the reward, and your motivation also goes up.
You might have noticed that this part of the equation is one of the basic equations of the
expected utility theory at the heart of economics. But one of the major criticisms of standard
economic theory was that it did not account for time. For example, in 1991 George Akerlof
pointed out that we irrationally ﬁnd present costs more salient than future costs. This led to
the ﬂowering of behavioral economics, which integrates time (among other things).
Hence the denominator, which covers the eﬀect of time on our motivation to do a task. The
longer the delay before we reap a task's reward, the less motivated we are to do it. And the
negative eﬀect of this delay on our motivation is ampliﬁed by our level of impulsiveness. For
highly impulsive people, delays do even greater damage to their motivation.
 
The Procrastination Equation in Action
As an example, consider the college student who must write a term paper.7 Unfortunately for
her, colleges have created a perfect storm of procrastination components. First, though the
value of the paper for her grades may be high, the more immediate value is very low,
assuming she dreads writing papers as much as most college students do.8 Moreover, her
expectancy is probably low. Measuring performance is hard, and any essay re-marked by
another professor may get a very diﬀerent grade: a B+ essay will get an A+ if she's lucky, or
a C+ if she's unlucky.9 There is also a large delay, since the paper is due at the end of the
semester. If our college student has an impulsive personality, the negative eﬀect of this

delay on her motivation to write the paper is greatly ampliﬁed. Writing a term paper is
grueling (low value), the results are uncertain (low expectancy), and the deadline is far away
(high delay).
But there's more. College dorms, and college campuses in general, might be the most
distracting places on earth. There are always pleasures to be had (campus clubs, parties,
relationships, games, events, alcohol) that are reliable, immediate, and intense. No wonder
that the task of writing a term paper can't compete. These potent distractions amplify the
negative eﬀect of the delay in the task's reward and the negative eﬀect of the student's level
of impulsiveness. 
 
How to Beat Procrastination
Although much is known about the neurobiology behind procrastination, I won't cover that
subject here.10 Instead, let's jump right to the solutions to our procrastination problem.
Once you know the procrastination equation, our general strategy is obvious. Since there is
usually little you can do about the delay of a task's reward, we'll focus on the three terms of
the procrastination equation over which we have some control. To beat procrastination, we
need to:
1. Increase your expectancy of success.
2. Increase the task's value (make it more pleasant and rewarding).
3. Decrease your impulsiveness.
You might think these things are out of your control, but researchers have found several
useful methods for achieving each of them.
Most of the advice below is taken from the best book on procrastination available, Piers
Steel's The Procrastination Equation, which explains these methods and others in more
detail.
 
Optimizing Optimism
If you don't think you can succeed, you'll have little motivation to do the task that needs
doing. You've probably heard the advice to "Be positive!" But how? So far, researchers have
identiﬁed three major techniques for increasing optimism: Success Spirals, Vicarious Victory,
and Mental Contrasting.
 
Success Spirals
One way to build your optimism for success is to make use of success spirals.11 When you
achieve one challenging goal after another, your obviously gain conﬁdence in your ability to
succeed. So: give yourself a series of meaningful, challenging but achievable goals, and then
achieve them! Set yourself up for success by doing things you know you can succeed at,
again and again, to keep your conﬁdence high.
Steel recommends that for starters, "it is often best to have process or learning goals rather
than product or outcome goals. That is, the goals are acquiring or reﬁning new skills or steps
(the process) rather than winning or getting the highest score (the product)."12
Wilderness classes and adventure education (rafting, rock-climbing, camping, etc.) are
excellent for this kind of thing.13 Learn a new skill, be it cooking or karate. Volunteer for more

responsibilities at work or in your community. Push a favorite hobby to the next level. The
key is to achieve one goal after another and pay attention to your successes.14 Your brain
will reward you with increased expectancy for success, and therefore a better ability to beat
procrastination.
 
Vicarious Victory
Pessimism and optimism are both contagious.15 Wherever you are, you probably have access
to community groups that are great for fostering positivity: Toastmasters, Rotary, Elks,
Shriners, and other local groups. I recommend you visit 5-10 such groups in your area and
join the best one.
You can also boost your optimism by watching inspirational movies, reading inspirational
biographies, and listening to motivational speakers.
 
Mental Contrasting
Many popular self-help books encourage creative visualization, the practice of regularly and
vividly imagining what you want to achieve: a car, a career, an achievement. Surprisingly,
research shows this method can actually drain your motivation.16
Unless, that is, you add a second crucial step: mental contrasting. After imagining what you
want to achieve, mentally contrast that with where you are now. Visualize your old, rusty car
and your small paycheck. This presents your current situation as an obstacle to be overcome
to achieve your dreams, and jumpstarts planning and eﬀort.17
 
Guarding Against Too Much Optimism
Finally, I should note that too much optimism can also be a problem,18 though this is less
common. For example, too much optimism about how long a task will take may cause you to
put it oﬀ until the last minute, which turns out to be too late. Something like Rhonda Byrne's
The Secret may be too optimistic.
How can you guard against too much optimism? Plan for the worst but hope for the best.19
Pay attention to how you procrastinate, make backup plans for failure, but then use the
methods in this article to succeed as much as possible.
 
 
Increasing Value
 
It's hard to be motivated to do something that doesn't have much value to us - or worse, is
downright unpleasant. The good news is that value is to some degree constructed and
relative. The malleability of value is a well-studied area called psychophysics,20 and
researchers have some advice for how we can inject value into necessary tasks.
 
 

 
Flow
If the task you're avoiding is boring, try to make it more diﬃcult, right up to the point where
the diﬃculty level matches your current skill, and you achieve "ﬂow."21 This is what the state
troopers of Super Troopers did: they devised strange games and challenges to make their
boring job passable. Myrtle Young made her boring job at a potato chip factory more
interesting and challenging by looking for potato chips that resembled celebrities and pulling
them oﬀ the conveyor belts.
 
Meaning
It also helps to make sure tasks are connected to something you care about for its own
sake,22 at least through a chain: you read the book so you can pass the test so you can get
the grade so you can get the job you want and have a fulﬁlling career. Breaking the chain
leaves a task feeling meaningless.
 
Energy
Obviously, tasks are harder when you don't have much energy.23 Tackle tasks when you are
most alert. This depends on your circadian rhythm,24 but most people have the most energy
during a period starting a few hours after they wake up and lasting 4 hours.25 Also, make
sure to get enough sleep and exercise regularly.26
Other things that have worked for many people are:
Drink lots of water.
Stop eating anything that contains wheat and other grains.
Use drugs (especially modaﬁnil) as necessary.
Do short but intense exercise once a week.
When tired, splash cold water on your face or take a shower or do jumping jacks or go
running.
Listen to music that picks up your mood.
De-clutter your life, because clutter is cognitively exhausting for your brain to process
all day long.
 
Rewards
One obvious way to inject more value into a task is to reward yourself for completing it.27
Also, mix bitter medicine with sweet honey. Pair a long-term interest with a short-term
pleasure.28 Find a workout partner whose company you enjoy. Treat yourself to a specialty
coﬀee when doing your taxes. I bribe myself with Pinkberry frozen yogurt to do things I hate
doing.
 
Passion
Of course, the most powerful way to increase the value of a task is to focus on doing what
you love wherever possible. It doesn't take much extra motivation for me to research meta-
ethics or write summaries of scientiﬁc self-help: that is what I love to do. Some people who

love playing video games have made careers out of it. To ﬁgure out which career might be
full of tasks that you love to do, taking a RIASEC personality test might help. In the USA,
O*NET can help you ﬁnd jobs that are in-demand and ﬁt your personality.
 
 
Handling Impulsiveness
Impulsiveness is, on average, the biggest factor in procrastination. Here are two of Steel's
(2010a) methods for dealing with impulsiveness.
 
Commit Now
Ulysses did not make it past the beautiful singing Sirens with willpower. Rather, he knew his
weaknesses and so he committed in advance to sail past them: he literally tied himself to his
ship's mast. Several forms of precommitment are useful in handling impulsiveness.29
One method is to "throw away the key": Close oﬀ tempting alternatives. Many people see a
productivity boost when they decide not to allow a TV in their home; I haven't owned one in
years. But now, TV and more is available on the internet. To block that, you might need a tool
like RescueTime. Or, unplug your router when you've got work to do.
Another method is to make failure really painful. The website stickK lets you set aside money
you will lose if you don't meet your goal, and ensures that you have an outside referee to
decide whether your met your goal or not. To "up the ante," set things up so that your money
will go to an organization you hate if you fail. And have your chosen referee agree to post the
details of your donation to Facebook if you don't meet your goal.
 
Set Goals
Hundreds of books stress SMART goals: goals that are Speciﬁc, Measurable, Attainable,
Realistic, and Time-Anchored.30 Is this recommendation backed by good research? Not quite.
First, notice that Attainable is redundant with Realistic, and Speciﬁc is Redundant with
Measurable and Time-Anchored. Second, important concepts are missing. Above, we
emphasized the importance of goals that are challenging (and thus, lead to "ﬂow") and
meaningful (connected to things you desire for their own sake).
It's also important to break up goals into lots of smaller subgoals which, by themselves, are
easier to achieve and have more immediate deadlines. Typically, daily goals are frequent
enough, but it can also help to set an immediate goal to break you through the "getting
started" threshold. Your ﬁrst goal can be "Write the email to the producer," and your next
goal can be the daily goal. Once that ﬁrst, 5-minute task has been completed, you'll probably
already be on your way to the larger daily goal, even if it takes 30 minutes or 2 hours.31
Also: Are your goals measuring inputs or outputs? Is your goal to spend 30 minutes on X or is
it to produce ﬁnal product X? Try it diﬀerent ways for diﬀerent tasks, and see what works for
you.
Because we are creatures of habit, it helps to get into a routine.32 For example: Exercise at
the same time, every day.
 

Conclusion
So there you have it. To beat procrastination, you need to increase your motivation to do
each task on which you are tempted to procrastinate. To do that, you can (1) optimize your
optimism for success on the task, (2) make the task more pleasant, and (3) take steps to
overcome your impulsiveness. And to do each of those things, use the speciﬁc methods
explained above (set goals, pre-commit, make use of success spirals, etc.).
A warning: Don't try to be perfect. Don't try to completely eliminate procrastination. Be real.
Overregulation will make you unhappy. You'll have to ﬁnd a balance.
But now you have the tools you need. Identify which parts of the procrastination equation
need the most work in your situation, and ﬁgure out which methods for dealing with that part
of the problem work best for you. Then, go out there and make yourself stronger, score that
job, and help save the world!
(And, read The Procrastination Equation if you want more detail than I included here.)
 
Next post: My Algorithm for Beating Procrastination
Previous post: Scientiﬁc Self-Help: The State of Our Knowledge
 
 
Notes
1 These are the ﬁctional characters used to illustrate the procrastination equation in Steel
(2010a).
2 Expectancy corresponds most closely to the commonly measured trait of "self eﬃcacy."
The relatively strong correlation between low self-eﬃcacy and procrastination (across 39
studies) is shown table 3 of Steel (2007).
3 In a recent post, Eliezer Yudkowsky claimed that "on a moment-to-moment basis, being in
the middle of doing the work is usually less painful than being in the middle of
procrastinating." Thus, "when you procrastinate, you're probably not procrastinating because
of the pain of working." That might be true for Eliezer in particular, but studies on
procrastination suggest it's not true for most people. The pain of doing a task is a major
factor contributing to procrastination. This is known as the problem of task
aversiveness (Brown 1991; Burka & Yuen 1983; Ellis & Knauss 1977), also known as the
problem of task appeal (Harris & Sutton, 1983) or as the dysphoric aﬀect (Milgram, Sroloﬀ, &
Rosenbaum, 1988). For an overview of additional literature demonstrating this point, see
page 75 of Steel (2007).
4 For an overview of the correlation between impulsiveness and procrastination, see pages
76-79 and 81 of Steel (2007).
5 This is recognized as one of the psychological laws of learning (Schwawrtz, 1989), and
plays a role in the dominant economic role of discounted utility (Loewenstein & Elster, 1992).
In particular, see the work on temporal construal theory (Trope & Liberman, 2003).
6 The procrastination equation is called temporal motivational theory (TMT). See Steel (2007)
on how TMT accounts for every major ﬁnding on procrastination. See Steel & Konig (2006) on
how TMT draws upon and integrates our best psychological theories of motivation. There are
other theories of procrastination - the most popular may be the decisional-avoidant-arousal

theory proposed by Ferrari (1992). But a recent meta-analysis shows that TMT is more
consistent with the data (Steel, 2010b). An important note is that the full version of TMT
places a constant in the denominator to prevent the denominator from skyrocketing into
inﬁnity as delay approaches 0. Also, 'impulsiveness' here is a substitute for 'susceptibility to
delay,' something which may vary by task, whereas 'impulsiveness' sounds like a stable
character trait that might not help to explain having diﬀerent motivations to perform
diﬀerent tasks.
7 This example taken from Steel (2010a). Academic procrastination is the most-studied kind
of procrastination (McCown & Roberts, 1994).
8 Even George Orwell hated writing. He wrote: "Writing a book is a horrible, exhausting
struggle, like a long bout of some painful illness."
9 See Cannings et al. (2005) and Newstead (2002).
10 Read chapter 3 of Steel (2010a).
11 In business academia, success spirals are known as "eﬃcacy-performance spirals" or
"eﬃcacy-performance deviation amplifying loops". See Lindsley et al. (1995).
12 See Steel (2010a), note 9 in chapter 7.
13 See Hans (2000), Feldman & Matjasko (2005), and World Organization of the Scout
Movement (1998).
14 Zimmerman (2002).
15 Aarts et al. (2008), Armitage & Conner (2001), Rivs & Sheeran (2003), van Knippenberg et
al. (2004).
16 Levin & Spei (2004), Rhue & Lynn (1987), Schneider (2001), Waldo & Merritt (2000).
17 Achtziger et al. (2008), Oettingen et al. (2005), Oettingen & Thorpe (2006), Kavanagh et
al. (2005), Pham & Taylor (1999).
18 Sigall et al. (2000).
19 Aspinwall (2005).
20 A good overview is Weber (2003).
21 Csikszentmihalyi (1990).
22 Miller & Brickman (2004), Schraw & Lehman (2001), Wolters (2003).
23 Steel (2007), Gropel & Steel (2008).
24 Furnham (2002).
25 Klein (2009).
26 Oaten & Cheng (2006).
27 Bandura (1976), Febbraro & Clum (1998), Ferrari & Emmons (1995). This is known as
learned industriousness, impulse pairing or impulse fusion. See Eisenberger (1992),
Renninger (2000), Stromer et al. (2000).

28 Ainslie (1992).
29 Ariely & Wertenbroch (2002) and Schelling (1992).
30 Locke & Latham (2002).
31 Gropel & Steel (2008), Steel (2010a).
32 Diefendorﬀ et al. (2006), Gollwitzer (1996), Silver (1974).
 
References
Aarts, Dijksterhuis, & Dik (2008). Goal contagion: Inferring goals from others' actions - and
what it leads to. In Shah & Gardner (Eds.), Handbook of motivation (pp. 265-280). New York:
Guilford Press.
Achtziger, Fehr, Oettingen, Gollwitzer, & Rockstroh (2008). Strategies of intention formation
are reﬂected in continuous MEG activity. Social Neuroscience, 4(1), 1-17.
Ainslie (1992). Picoeconomics: The strategic interaction of successive motivational states
within the person. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ariely & Wertenbroch (2002). Procrastination, deadlines, and performance: Self-control by
precommitment. Psychological Science, 13(3): 219-224.
Armitage & Conner (2001). Eﬃcacy of the theory of planned behavior: A meta-analytic
review. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40(4): 471-499.
Aspinwall (2005). The psychology of future-oriented thinking: From achievement to proactive
coping, adaptation, and aging. Motivation and Emotion, 29(4): 203-235.
Bandura (1976). Self-reinforcement: Theoretical and methodological considerations.
Behaviorism, 4(2): 135-155.
Brown (1991). Helping students confront and deal with stress and procrastination. Journal of
College Student Psychotherapy, 6: 87-102.
Burka & Yuen (1983). Procrastination: Why you do it, what to do about it. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Cannings, Hawthorne, Hood, & Houston (2005). Putting double marking to the test: a
framework to assess if it is worth the trouble. Medical Education, 39(3): 299-308.
Csikszentmihalyi (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper &
Row.
Diefendorﬀ, Richard, & Gosserand (2006). Examination of situational and attitudinal
moderators of the hesitation and performance relation. Personnel Psychology, 59: 365-393.
Eisenberger (1992). Learned industriousness. Psychological Review, 99: 248-267.
Ellis & Knauss (1977). Overcoming procrastination. New York: Signet Books.
Febbraro & Clum (1998). Meta-analytic investigation of the eﬀectiveness of self-regulatory
components in the treatment of adult problem behaviors. Clinical Psychology Review, 18(2):
143-161.

Feldman & Matjasko (2005). The role of school-based extracurricular activities in adolescent
development: A comprehensive review and future directions. Review of Educational
Research, 75(2), 159-210.
Ferrari (1992). Psychometric validation of two procrastination inventoriesfor adults: Arousal
and avoidance measures. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 14(2): 97-
110.
Ferrari & Emmons (1995). Methods of procrastination and their relation to self-control and
self-reinforcement: An exploratory study. Journal of Social Behavior & Personality, 10(1): 135-
142.
Furnham (2002). Personality at work: The role of individual diﬀerences in the workplace. New
York: Routledge.
Gollwitzer (1996). The volitional beneﬁts from planning. In Gollwitzer & Bargh (Eds.), The
psychology of action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 287-312). New York:
Guilford Press.
Gropel & Steel (2008). A mega-trial investigation of goal setting, interest enhancement, and
energy on procrastination. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 45: 406-411.
Hans (2000). A meta-analysis of the eﬀects of adventure programming on locus of control.
Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 30(1): 33-60.
Harris & Sutton (1983). Task procrastination in organizations: A framework for research.
Human Relations, 36: 987-995.
Kavanagh, Andrade, & May (2005). Imaginary relish and exquisite torture: The elaborated
intrusion theory of desire. Psychological Review, 112(2), 446-467.
Klein (2009). The secret pulse of time: Making sense of life's scarcest commodity.
Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Lifelong Books.
Levin & Spei (2004). Relationship of purported measures of pathological and nonpathological
dissociation to self-reported psychological distress and fantasy immersion. Assessment,
11(2): 160-168.
Lindsley, Brass, & Thomas (1995). Eﬃcacy-performance spirals: A multilevel perspective.
Academy of Management Review, 20(3): 645-678.
Locke & Latham (2002). Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and task
motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American Psychologist, 57(9): 705-717.
Loewenstein & Elster (1992). The fall and rise of psychological explanations in the economics
of intertemporal choice. In Loewenstein & Elster (Eds.), Choice over time (pp. 3-34). New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
McCown & Roberts (1994). A study of academic and work-related dysfunctioning relevant to
the college version of an indirect measure of impulsive behavior. Integra Technical Paper 94-
28, Radnor, PA: Integra, Inc.
Milgram, Sroloﬀ, & Rosenbaum (1988). The procrastination of everyday life. Journal of
Research in Personality, 22: 197-212.
Miller & Brickman (2004). A model of future-oriented motivation and self-regulation.
Educational Psychology Review, 16(1): 9-33.
Newstead (2002). Examining the examiners: Why are we so bad at assessing students?
Psychology Learning and Teaching, 2(2): 70-75.

Oaten & Cheng (2006). Longitudinal gains in self-regulation from regular physical exercise.
British Journal of Health Psychology, 11(4): 713-733.
Oettingen, Mayer, Thorpe, Janatzke, & Lorenz (2005). Turning fantasies about positive and
negative futures into self-improvement goals. Motivation and Emotion, 29(4): 236-266.
Oettingen & Thorpe (2006). Fantasy realization and the bridging of time. In Sanna & Chang
(Eds.), Judgments over time: The interplay of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors (pp. 120-
143). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pham & Taylor (1999). From thought to action: Eﬀects of process- versus outcome-based
mental simulations on performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25: 250-260.
Renninger (2000). Individual interest and its implications for understanding intrinsic
motivation. In Sansone & Harackiewicz (Eds.), Inntrinsic and extrinsic motivation: The search
for optimal motivation and performance (pp. 373-404). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Rhue & Lynn (1987). Fantasy proneness: The ability to hallucinate "as real as real." British
Journal of Experimental and Clinical Hypnosis, 4: 173-180.
Rivis & Sheeran (2003). Descriptive norms as an additional predictor in the theory of planned
behaviour: A meta-analysis. Current Psychology, 22(3), 218-233.
Schelling (1992). Self-command: A new discipline. In Loewenstein & Elster (Eds.), Choice over
time (pp. 167-176). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Schneider (2001). In search of realistic optimism: Meaning, knowledge, and warm fuzziness.
American Psychologist, 56(3): 250-263.
Schraw & Lehman (2001). Situational interest: A review of the literature and directions for
future research. Educational Psychology Review, 13(1): 23-52.
Schwartz (1989). Psychology of learning and behavior (3rd ed.). New York: Norton.
Sigall, Kruglanski, & Fyock (2000). Wishful thinking and procrastination. Journal of Social
Behavior & Personality, 15(5): 283-296.
Silver (1974). Procrastination. Centerpoint, 1(1): 49-54.
Steel (2007). The nature of procrastination. Psychological Bulletin, 133(1): 65-94.
Steel (2010a). The Procrastination Equation. New York: Harper.
Steel (2010b). Arousal, avoidant and decisional procrastinators: Do they exist? Personality
and Individual Diﬀerences, 48: 926-934.
Steel & Konig (2006). Integrating theories of motivation. Academy of Management Review,
31(4): 889-913. 
Trope & Liberman (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological Review, 110: 403-421.
van Knippenberg, van Nippenberg, De Cremer, & Hegg (2004). Leadership, self, and identity:
A review and research agenda. The Leadership Quarterly, 15(6), 825-856.
Waldo & Merritt (2000). Fantasy proneness, dissociation, and DSM-IV axis II symptomatology.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109(3): 555-558.
Weber (2003). Perception matters: Psychophysics for economists. In Brocas & Carrillo (Eds.),
The Psychology of Economic Decisions (Vol. II). New York: Oxford University Press.

Wolters (2003). Understanding procrastination from a self-regulated learning perspective.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(1): 179-187.
World Organization of the Scout Movement (1998). Scouting: An educational system.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Scout Bureau.
Zimmerman (2002). Becoming a self-regulated learner: An overview. Theory into Practice,
41(2): 64-70.

My Algorithm for Beating Procrastination
Part of the sequence: The Science of Winning at Life
After three months of practice, I now use a single algorithm to beat procrastination most of
the times I face it.1 It probably won't work for you quite like it did for me, but it's the best
advice on motivation I've got, and it's a major reason I'm known for having the "gets shit
done" property. There are reasons to hope that we can eventually break the chain of akrasia;
maybe this post is one baby step in the right direction.
How to Beat Procrastination explained our best current general theory of procrastination,
called "temporal motivation theory" (TMT). As an exercise in practical advice backed by deep
theories, this post explains the process I use to beat procrastination — a process implied by
TMT.
As a reminder, here's a rough sketch of how motivation works according to TMT:
Or, as Piers Steel summarizes:
Decrease the certainty or the size of a task's reward — its expectancy or its value — and
you are unlikely to pursue its completion with any vigor. Increase the delay for the task's
reward and our susceptibility to delay — impulsiveness — and motivation also dips.
Of course, my motivation system is more complex than that. P.J. Eby likens TMT (as a guide
for beating procrastination) to the "fuel, air, ignition, and compression" plan for starting your
car: it might be true, but a more useful theory would include details and mechanism.
That's a fair criticism. Just as an fMRI captures the "big picture" of brain function at low
resolution, TMT captures the big picture of motivation. This big picture helps us see where
we need to work at the gears-and-circuits level, so we can become the goal-directed
consequentialists we'd like to be.
So, I'll share my four-step algorithm below, and tackle the gears-and-circuits level in later
posts.
 
Step 1: Notice I'm procrastinating.
This part's easy. I know I should do the task, but I feel averse to doing it, or I just don't feel
motivated enough to care. So I put it oﬀ, even though my prefrontal cortex keeps telling me
I'll be better oﬀ if I do it now. When this happens, I proceed to step 2.
 
Step 2: Guess which unattacked part of the equation is causing me the most trouble.
Now I get to play detective. Which part of the equation is causing me trouble, here? Does the
task have low value because it's boring or painful or too diﬃcult, or because the reward isn't

that great? Do I doubt that completing the task will pay oﬀ? Would I have to wait a long time
for my reward if I succeeded? Am I particularly impatient or impulsive, either now or in
general? Which part of this problem do I need to attack?
Actually, I lied. I like to play army sniper. I stare down my telescopic sight at the terms in the
equation and interrogate them. "Is it you, Delay? Huh, motherfucker? Is it you? I've shot you
before; don't think I won't do it again!"
But not everyone was raised on violent videogames. You may prefer a diﬀerent role-play.
Anyway, I try to ﬁgure out where the main problem is. Here are some of the signs I look for:
When I imagine myself doing the task, do I see myself bored and distracted instead of
engaged and interested? Is the task uncomfortable, onerous, or painful? Am I nervous about
the task, or afraid of what might happen if I undertake it? Has the task's payoﬀ lost its value
to me? Perhaps it never had much value to me in the ﬁrst place? If my answer to any of
these questions is "Yes," I'm probably facing the motivation problem of low value.
Do I think I'm likely to succeed at the task? Do I think it's within my capabilities? Do I think I'll
actually get the reward if I do succeed? If my answer to any of these questions is "No," I'm
probably facing the problem of low expectancy.
How much of the reward only comes after a signiﬁcant delay, and how long is that delay? If
most of the reward comes after a big delay, I'm probably the facing the problem of, you
guessed it, delay.
Do I feel particularly impatient? Am I easily distracted by other tasks, even ones for which I
also face problems of low value, low expectancy, or delay? If so, I'm probably facing the
problem of impulsiveness.
If the task is low value and low expectancy, and the reward is delayed, I run my expected
value calculation again. Am I sure I should do the task, after all? Maybe I should drop it or
delegate it. If after re-evaluation I still think I should do the task, then I move to step 3.
 
Step 3: Try several methods for attacking that speciﬁc problem.
Once I've got a plausible suspect in my sights, I ﬁre away with the most suitable ammo I've
got for that problem. Here's a quick review of some techniques described in How to Beat
Procrastination:
For attacking the problem of low value: Get into a state of ﬂow, perhaps by gamifying the
task. Ensure the task has meaning by connecting it to what you value intrinsically. Get more
energy. Use reward and punishment. Focus on what you love, wherever possible.
For attacking the problem of low expectancy: Give yourself a series of small, challenging but
achieveable goals so that you get yourself into a "success spiral" and expect to succeed.
Consume inspirational material. Surround yourself with others who are succeeding. Mentally
contrast where you are now and where you want to be.
For attacking the problem of delay: Decrease the reward's delay if possible. Break the task
into smaller chunks so you can get rewards each step of the way.
For attacking the problem of impulsiveness: Use precommitment. Set speciﬁc and
meaningful goals and subgoal and sub-subgoals. Measure your behavior. Build useful habits.
Each of these skills must be learned and practiced ﬁrst before you can use them. It took me
only a few days to learn the mental habit of "mental contrasting," but I spent weeks
practicing the skill of getting myself into success spirals. I've spent months trying various

methods for having more energy, but I can do a lot better than I'm doing now. I'm not very
good at goal-setting yet.
 
Step 4: If I'm still procrastinating, return to step 2.
If I've found some successful techniques for attacking the term in the motivation equation I
thought was causing me the most trouble, but I'm still procrastinating, I return to step 2 and
begin my assault on another term in the equation.
When I ﬁrst began using this algorithm, though, I usually didn't get that far. By the time I had
learned mental contrasting or success spirals or whatever tool made the diﬀerence, the task
was either complete or abandoned. This algorithm only begins to shine, I suspect, once
you've come to some level of mastery on most of the subroutines it employs. Then you can
quickly employ them and, if you're still procrastinating, immediately employ others, until
your procrastination is beaten.
 
Personal examples
Let me give you some idea of what it looks like for me to use this algorithm:
Building the large 5×5-unit Ikea "Expedit" bookshelf is boring and repetitive, so I made a
game of it. I pounded each wooden peg 4 or 5 times, alternating between these two counts
no matter how quickly each peg went into its hole, waiting to see if the girl I was with would
notice the pattern. She didn't, so after every 10th peg I gave her a kiss, waiting to see if
she'd catch that pattern. She didn't, so I started kissing her after every 5th peg.2 Apparently
she thought I was just especially amorous that night.
Sometimes, being an executive director just ain't fun. I need to make lots of decisions with
large but uncertain consequences — decisions that some people will love and others will
hate. This is not as cozy as the quiet researcher's life to which I had been growing
accustomed. In many cases, the task of coming to a decision on something is fraught with
anxiety and fear, and I procrastinate. In these cases, I remind myself of how the decision is
connected to what I care about. I also purposely stoke my passion for the organization's
mission by playing epic world-saving music like "Butterﬂies and Hurricanes" by Muse:
"Change everything you are... your number has been called... you've got to be the best,
you've got to change the world... your time is now." Then I re-do my VoI and EV calculations
again and I god damned try.
While researching How to Beat Procrastination, I hired a German tutor. I planned to apply to
philosophy graduate schools, which meant I needed to speak Greek, Latin, French, or
German, and German philosophy isn't quite as universally bad as the others (e.g. see
Thomas Metzinger). But I procrastinated when studying, for my reward was very uncertain:
would I actually go the route of philosophy grad school, and would my knowledge of German
help? My reward was also extremely delayed, likely by several years. In the end, I did the
expected value calculation more carefully than before, and concluded that I shouldn't keep
trying to speak my Rs from my throat. It was the right call: I'm now pretty certain I'll never
go to philosophy grad school.
Three times, I've started writing books. But each time, the rewards (appreciation, notoriety,
money) were so delayed and uncertain that I gave up. Instead, I broke the books into chunks
that I could publish as individual articles.3 Thus, I received some reward (appreciation,
growing notoriety) after every article, and had relatively high expectancy for this reward
(since my goal was no longer so lofty as to be picked up by a major publisher). Breaking it
into chunks also allowed me to focus on writing the pieces for which I had the most passion.
Along the way, I used many techniques to boost my energy.

Conclusion
The key is to be prepared to conquer procrastination by practicing the necessary sub-skills
ﬁrst. Build small skills in the right order. You can't play Philip Glass if you haven't ﬁrst learned
how to play scales, how to work the pedals, how to play arpeggios and ostinatos (lots of
arpeggios and ostinatos), etc. And you can't beat procrastination if you don't have any
ammo ready when you've caught the right causal factor in your sights.
The quest toward becoming a goal-directed consequentialist is long and challenging, much
like that of becoming a truth-aiming rationalist. But the rewards are great, and the journey
has perks. Remember: true agency is rare but powerful. As Michael Vassar says, "Evidence
that people are crazy is evidence that things are easier than you think." Millions of projects
fail not because they "can't be done" but because the ﬁrst 5 people who tried them failed
due to boring, pedestrian reasons like procrastination or the planning fallacy. People with just
a bit more agency than normal — people like Benjamin Franklin and Tim Ferriss — have
incredible power.
At the end of Reasons and Persons, Derek Parﬁt notes that non-religious ethics is a young
ﬁeld, and thus we may entertain high hopes for what will be discovered and what is possible.
But scientiﬁc self-help is even younger. We have only just begun our inquiry into
procrastination's causes and cures. We don't yet know what is possible. All we can do is try.
If you have something to protect, shut up and do the impossible. Things may not be so
impossible as you once thought.
 
Next post: How to Be Happy
Previous post: How to Beat Procrastination
 
 
1 The main areas where I still usually succumb to procrastination are diet and exercise.
Luckily, my metabolism is holding out pretty well so far.
2 Or, it was something like this. I can't remember the exact game I played, now.
3 My abandoned book Scientiﬁc Self Help turned into my ongoing blog post sequence The
Science of Winning at Life. My abandoned book Ethics and Superintelligence was broken into
chunks that morphed into Singularity FAQ, The Singularity and Machine Ethics, and many
posts from No-Nonsense Metaethics and Facing the Singularity. My abandoned book Friendly
AI: The Most Important Problem in the World was broken into pieces that resulted in
Existential Risk and some posts of Facing the Singularity.

How to Be Happy
Part of the sequence: The Science of Winning at Life
One day a coworker said to me, "Luke! You're, like, the happiest person I know! How
come you're so happy all the time?"
It was probably a rhetorical question, but I had a very long answer to give. See, I
was unhappy for most of my life,1 and even considered suicide a few times. Then I
spent two years studying the science of happiness. Now, happiness is my natural
state. I can't remember the last time I felt unhappy for longer than 20 minutes.
That kind of change won't happen for everyone, or even most people (beware of
other-optimizing), but it's worth a shot! 
We all want to be happy, and happiness is useful for other things, too.2 For example,
happiness improves physical health,3 improves creativity,4 and even enables you to
make better decisions.5 (It's harder to be rational when you're unhappy.6) So, as part
of a series on how to win at life with science and rationality, let's review the science
of happiness.
 
The correlates of happiness
Earlier, I noted that there is an abundance of research on factors that correlate
with subjective well-being (individuals' own assessments of their happiness and life
satisfaction).
Factors that don't correlate much with happiness include:
age,7 gender,8 parenthood,9 intelligence,10 physical attractiveness,11 and money12 (as
long as you're above the poverty line). Factors that correlate moderately with
happiness include: health,13 social activity,14 and religiosity.15 Factors that correlate
strongly with happiness include: genetics,16 love and relationship satisfaction,17 and
work satisfaction.18
But correlation is not enough. We want to know what causes happiness. And that is a
trickier thing to measure. But we do know a few things.
 
Happiness, personality, and skills
Genes account for about 50% of the variance in happiness.19 Even lottery winners and
newly-made quadriplegics do not see as much of a change in happiness as you would
expect.20 Presumably, genes shape your happiness by shaping your personality, which
is known to be quite heritable.21
So which personality traits tend to correlate most with happiness? Extroversion is
among the best predictors of happiness,22 as are conscientiousness, agreeableness,
self-esteem, and optimism.23

What if you don't have those traits? The ﬁrst thing to say is that you might be capable
of them without knowing it. Introversion, for example, can be exacerbated by a lack of
social skills. If you decide to learn and practice social skills, you might ﬁnd that you
are more extroverted than you thought! (That's what happened to me.) The same
goes for conscientiousness, agreeableness, self-esteem, and optimism - these are only
partly linked to personality. They are to some extent learnable skills, and learning
these skills (or even "acting as if") can increase happiness.24
The second thing to say is that lacking some of these traits does not, of course, doom
you to unhappiness.
Happiness is subjective and relative
Happiness is not determined by objective factors, but by how you feel about them.25
Happiness is also relative26: you'll probably be happier making $25,000/yr in Costa
Rica (where your neighbors are making $13,000/yr) than you will be making
$80,000/yr in Beverly Hills (where your neighbors are making $130,000/yr).
Happiness is relative in another sense, too: it is relative to your expectations.27 We are
quite poor at predicting the strength of our emotional reactions to future events. We
overestimate the misery we will experience after a romantic breakup, failure to get a
promotion, or even contracting an illness. We also overestimate the pleasure we will
get from buying a nice car, getting a promotion, or moving to a lovely coastal city. So:
lower your expectations about the pleasure you'll get from such expenditures.
 
Flow and mindfulness
You may have heard of the famous studies28 showing that people are happiest when
they are in a state of "ﬂow." Flow is the state you're in when you are fully engaged in
a task that is interesting, challenging, and intrinsically rewarding to you. This is the
experience of "losing yourself in the moment" or, as sports players say, "being in the
zone."
Finding ﬂow has largely to do with performing tasks that match your skill level. When
a task is far beyond your skill level, you will feel defeated. When a task is too easy,
you'll be bored. Only when a task is challenging but achievable will you feel good
about doing it. I'm reminded of the state troopers in Super Troopers, who devised
strange games and challenges to make their boring jobs passable. Myrtle Young made
her boring job at a potato chip factory more interesting and challenging by looking for
potato chips that resembled celebrities, and pulling them oﬀ the conveyor belts for
her collection.
If you're struggling with negative thoughts, achieving ﬂow is probably the best
medicine. Contrary to popular wisdom, forced positive thinking often makes things
worse.29 Trying to not think about Upsetting Thought X has the same eﬀect as trying
to not think about pink elephants: you can't help but think about pink elephants.

While being "lost in the moment" may provide some of your happiest moments,
research has also shown that when you're not in ﬂow, taking a step outside the
moment and practicing "mindfulness" - that is, paying attention to your situation, your
actions, and your feelings - can reduce chronic pain and depression30, reduce stress
and anxiety31, and produce a wide range of other positive eﬀects.32 
 
How to be happier
Happiness, then, is an enormously complex thing. Worse, we must remember the
diﬀerence between experienced happiness and remembered happiness. I can only
scratch the surface of happiness research in this tiny post. In short, there is no simple
ﬁx for unhappiness; no straight path to bliss.
Moreover, happiness will be achieved diﬀerently for diﬀerent people. A person
suﬀering from depression due to chemical imbalance may get more help from a pill
than from learning better social skills. A healthy, extroverted, agreeable, conscientious
woman can still be unhappy if she is trapped in a bad marriage. Some people were
raised by parents whose parenting style did not encourage the development of
healthy self-esteem,33 and they will need to devote signiﬁcant energy to overcome
this deﬁcit. For some, the road to happiness is long. For others, it is short.
Below, I review a variety of methods for becoming happier. Some of them I discussed
above; many, I did not.
These methods are ranked roughly in descending order of importance and eﬀect,
based on my own reading of the literature. You will need to think about who you are,
what makes you happy, what makes you unhappy, and what you can achieve in order
to determine which of the below methods should be attempted ﬁrst. Also, engaging
any of these methods may require that you ﬁrst gain some mastery over
procrastination.
Here, then, are some methods for becoming happier34:
1. If you suﬀer from serious illness, depression, anxiety, paranoia, schizophrenia, or
other serious problems, seek professional help ﬁrst. Here's how.
2. Even if you don't need professional help, you may beneﬁt from some self-
exploration and initial guidance from a reductionistic, naturalistic counselor like
Tom Clark.
3. Develop the skills and habits associated with extroversion. First, get some
decent clothes and learn how to wear them properly. If you're a guy, read these
books. If you're a girl, ask your girlfriends or try these books. Next, learn
basic social skills, including body language. If you're really introverted, practice
on Chatroulette or Omegle ﬁrst. Next, spend more time with other people,
making small talk. Go to meetups and CouchSurﬁng group activities. Practice
your skills until they become more natural, and you ﬁnd yourself enjoying being
in the company of others. Learn how to be funny and practice that, too.
4. Improve your self-esteem and optimism. This is tricky. First, too much self-
esteem can lead to harmful narcissism.35 Second, it's not clear that a rationalist
can endorse several standard methods for improving one's self esteem (self-
serving bias, basking in reﬂected glory, self-handicapping)36 because they toy
with self-deception and anti-epistemology. But there are a few safe ways to

increase your self-esteem and optimism. Make use of success spirals, vicarious
victory, and mental contrasting, as described here.
5. Improve your agreeableness. In simpler terms, this basically means: increase
your empathy. Unfortunately, little is currently known (scientiﬁcally) about how
to increase one's empathy.37 The usual advice about trying to see things from
another's perspective, and thinking more about people less fortunate than
oneself, will have to do for now. The organization Roots of Empathy may have
some good advice, too.
6. Improve your conscientiousness. Conscientiousness involves a variety of
tendencies: useful organization, strong work ethic, reliability, planning ahead,
etc. Each of these individual skills can be learned. The techniques for
overcoming procrastination are useful, here. Some people report that books like
Getting Things Done have helped them become more organized and reliable.
7. Develop the habit of gratitude. Savor the good moments throughout each
day.38 Spend time thinking about happy memories.39 And at the end of each
day, write down 5 things you are grateful for: the roof over your head, your good
fortune at being born in a wealthy country, the existence of Less Wrong, the
taste of chocolate, the feel of orgasm... whatever. It sounds childish, but it
works.40
8. Find your purpose and live it. One beneﬁt of religion may be that it gives people
a sense of meaning and purpose. Without a magical deity to give you purpose,
though, you'll have to ﬁnd out for yourself what drives you. It may take a while
to ﬁnd it though, and you may have to dip your hands and mind into many
ﬁelds. But once you ﬁnd a path that strongly motivates you and fulﬁlls you, take
it. (Of course, you might not ﬁnd one purpose but many.) Having a strong sense
of meaning and purpose has a wide range of positive eﬀects.41 The 'ﬁnd a
purpose' recommendation also oﬀers an illustration of how methods may diﬀer
in importance for people. 'Find a purpose' is not always emphasized in happiness
literature, but for my own brain chemistry I suspect that ﬁnding motivating
purposes has made more diﬀerence in my life than anything else on this list.
9. Find a more fulﬁlling job. Few people do what they love for a living. Getting to
that point can be diﬃcult and complicated. You may ﬁnd that doing 10 other
things on this list ﬁrst is needed for you to have a good chance at getting a more
fulﬁlling job. To ﬁgure out which career might be full of tasks that you love to do,
a RIASEC personality test might help. In the USA, O*NET can help you ﬁnd jobs
that are in-demand and ﬁt your personality.
10. Improve your relationship with your romantic partner, or ﬁnd a diﬀerent one. As
with ﬁnding a more fulﬁlling job, this one is complicated, but can have major
impact. If you know your relationship isn't going anywhere, you may want to
drop it so you can spend more time developing yourself, which will improve
future relationships. If you're pretty serious about your partner, there are many
things you can do to improve the relationship. Despite being touted widely,
"active listening" doesn't predict relationship success.42 Tested advice for
improving the chances of relationship success and satisfaction include: (1) do
novel and exciting things with your partner often43, (2) say positive things to and
about your partner at least 5 times more often than you say negative things44,
(3) spend each week writing about why your relationship is better than some
others you know about45, (4) qualify every criticism of your partner with a review
of one or two of their positive qualities46, and (5) stare into each other's eyes
more often.47
11. Go outside and move your body. This will improve your attention and well-
being.48

12. Spend more time in ﬂow. Drop impossible tasks in favor of tasks that are at the
outer limits of your skillset. Make easy and boring tasks more engaging by
turning them into games or adding challenges for yourself.
13. Practice mindfulness regularly. When not in ﬂow, step outside yourself and pay
attention to how you are behaving, how your emotions are functioning, and how
your current actions work toward your goals. Meditation may help.
14. Avoid consumerism. The things you own do come to own you, in a sense.
Consumerism leads to unhappiness.49 Unfortunately, you've probably been
programmed from birth to see through the lens of consumerism. One way to
start deprogramming is by watching this documentary about the deliberate
invention of consumerism by Edward Bernays. After that, you may want to sell or
give away many of your possessions and, more importantly, drastically change
your purchasing patterns.
Note that seeking happiness as an end might be counterproductive. Many people
report that constantly checking to see if they are happy actually decreases their
happiness - a report that ﬁts with the research on "ﬂow." It may be better to seek
some of the above goals as ends, and happiness will be a side-eﬀect.
Remember: Happiness will not come from reading articles on the internet. Happiness
will come when you do the things research recommends.
Good luck!
 
Next post: The Good News of Situationist Psychology
Previous post: How to Beat Procrastination
 
 
Notes
1 From a young age through my teenage years, I was known as the pessimist in my family. Of course, I would retort
I was merely a realist. Making happiness work within me made me an optimist. These days I'm pessimistic about
many things: For example I think there's about a 50/50 chance the human species will survive this century. But it's
a kind of rationalistic, emotionally detached pessimism. It doesn't aﬀect my mood.
2 Lyubomirsky, King, & Diener (2005).
3 Steptoe et al. (2005).
4 Isen et al. (1987); Isen (2004); Fredrickson (1998).
5 Isen (2002); Morris (1999).
6 Beck (2008); Ellis (2001).
7 Age and happiness are unrelated (Lykken 1999), age accounting for less than 1% of the variation in people's
happiness (Inglehart 1990; Myers & Diener 1997).
8 Despite being treated for depressive disorders twice as often as men (Nolen-Hoeksema 2002), women report just
as high levels of well-being as men do (Myers 1992).

9 Apparently, the joys and stresses of parenthood balance each other out, as people with and without children are
equally happy (Argyle 2001).
10 Both IQ and educational attainment appear to be unrelated to happiness (Diener et al. 2009; Ross & Van Willigen
1997).
11 Good-looking people enjoy huge advantages, but do not report greater happiness than others (Diener et al.
1995).
12 The correlation between income and happiness is surprisingly weak (Diener & Seligman 2004; Diener et al.
1993; Johnson & Krueger 2006). One problem may be that higher income contributes to greater materialism, which
impedes happiness (Frey & Stutzer 2002; Kasser et al. 2004; Solberg et al. 2002; Kasser 2002; Van Boven 2005;
Nickerson et al. 2003; Kahneman et al. 2006).
13 Those with disabling health conditions are happier than you might think (Myers 1992; Riis et al. 2005; Argyle
1999).
14 Those who are satisﬁed with their social life are moderately more happy than others (Diener & Seligman 2004;
Myers 1999; Diener & Seligman 2002).
15 Religiosity correlates with happiness (Abdel-Kahlek 2005; Myers 2008), though it may be religious attendance
and not religious belief that matters (Chida et al. 2009).
16 Past happiness is the best predictor of future happiness (Lucas & Diener 2008). Happiness is surprisingly
unmoved by external factors (Lykken & Tellegen 1996), because genes accounts for about 50% of the variance in
happiness (Lyubomirsky et al. 2005; Stubbe et al. 2005).
17 Married people are happier than those who are single or divorced (Myers & Diener 1995; Diener et al. 2000), and
marital satisfaction predicts happiness (Proulx et al. 2007).
18 Unemployment makes people very unhappy (Argyle 2001), and job satisfaction is strongly correlated with
happiness (Judge & Klinger 2008; Warr 1999).
19 Lyubomirsky et al. (2005); Stubbe et al. (2005).
20 Brickman et al. (1978).
21 Weiss et al. (2008).
22 Lucas & Diener (2008); Fleeson et al. (2002).
23 Lucas (2008) and Lyubomirsky et al. (2006).
24 On the learnability of extroversion, see Fleeson et al. (2002); Bouchard & Loehlin (2001); McNeil & Fleeson
(2006). On the learnability of agreeableness, see Graziano & Tobin (2009). On the learnability of conscientiousness,
see Roberts et al. (2009). On the learnability of self-esteem, see Barrett et al. (1999); Borras et al. (2009). On the
learnability of optimism, see Lindsley et al. (1995); Hans (2000); Feldman & Matjasko (2005). On the learnability of
character traits in general, see Peterson & Seligman (2004).
25 Schwarz & Strack (1999).
26 Argyle (1999); Hagerty (2000).
27 Gilbert (2006), Hsee & Hastie (2005), Wilson & Gilbert (2005).
28 Csikszentmihalyi (1990, 1998); Gardner, Csikszentmihalyi & Damon (2002); Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi
(2009).
29 Wegner (1989).
30 Kabat-Zinn (1982).
31 Shapiro et al. (1998); Chang et al. (2004).

32 Grossman et al. (2004).
33 Felson (1989); Harter (1998); Furnham & Cheng (2000); Wissink et al. (2006).
34 There are several disputed and uncertain methods I did not mention. One example is "expressive writing."
Compare Lepore & Smyth (2002) and Spera et al. (1994) to Seery et al. (2008). Moreover, talking with a others
about bad experiences may help, but maybe not: see Zech & Rimé (2005). Another disputed method is that of
improving mood by thinking quicker and more varied thoughts: see Pronin & Jacobs (2008). I'm waiting for more
research to come in on that one. The results of "aﬀectionate writing" are mixed: see Floyd et al. (2009). The eﬀects
of household plants are also mixed: see Bringslimark et al. (2009). There remains debate on whether forced smiles
and laughter improve happiness. Finally, see the review of literature in Helliwell (2011).
35 Crocker & Park (2004); Bushman & Baumeister (1998); Bushman & Baumeister (2002).
36 Self-serving bias is the tendency to attribute success to internal causes (oneself), but attribute failure to external
causes. Basking in reﬂected glory is an attempt to enhance one's image by announcing and displaying association
with a well-perceived group or individual. Self-handicapping is a way of saving face by sabotaging one's
performance in order to provide an excuse for the failure.
37 See, for example: Stepien & Baernstein (2006); de Vignemont & Singer (2006); Heln & Singer (2008).
38 Bryant & Veroﬀ (2007).
39 Burton & King (2004).
40 Emmons & McCullough (2003); Lyubomirsky et al. (2005); Peterson (2006).
41 Park & Folkman (1997); Bauer et al. (2008); Lee et al. (2006); Reker et al. (1987); Ulmer et al. (1991); Langer &
Rodin (1976).
42 Gottman et al. (1998); Hahlweg et al. (1984); Jacobson et al. (1987).
43 Aron et al. (2000); Aron et al. (2003).
44 Gottman (1984).
45 Buunk et al. (2001).
46 Murray & Holmes (1999).
47 Aron et al. (2000). As for how to ﬁnd, attract, and keep a great romantic partner in the ﬁrst place, well: that will
have to wait for another article. And of course, perhaps you're not looking for a long term romantic relationship at
all. That's another article, too.
48 Berto (2005); Hartig et al. (2003); Kaplan (1993, 2001); Price (2008); Berman et al. (2008); Tennessen &
Cimprich (1995).
49 Frey & Stutzer (2002); Kasser et al. (2004); Solberg et al. (2002); Kasser (2002); Van Boven (2005); Nickerson et
al. (2003); Kahneman et al. (2006).
 
References
Argyle (1999). Causes and correlates of happiness. In Kahneman, Diener, & Schwartz (Eds.), Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology. New York: Sage.
Argyle (2001). The Psychology of Happiness (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Aron, Norman, Aron, McKenna, & Heyman (2000). Couples shared participation in novel and arousing activities and
experienced relationship quality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78: 273-283.
Aron, Norman, Aron, & Lewandowski (2003). Shared participation in self- expanding activities: Positive eﬀects on
experienced marital quality. In Noller & Feeney (Eds.), Marital interaction (pp. 177-196). Cambridge University

Press.
Barrett, Webster, Wallis (1999). Adolescent self-esteem and cognitive skills training: a school-based intervention.
Journal of Child and Family Studies 8(2): 217-227.
Bauer, McAdams, & Pals (2008). Narrative identity and eudaimonic well-being. Journal of Happiness Studies, 9: 81-
104.
Beck (2008). The evolution of the cognitive model of depression and its neurobiological correlates. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 165: 969-977.
Berman, Jonides, & Kaplan (2008). The cognitive beneﬁts of interacting with nature. Psychological Science, 19:
1207-1212.
Berto (2005). Exposure to restorative environments helps restore attentional capacity. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 25: 249-259.
Brickman, Coates, & Janoﬀ-Bulman (1978). Lottery winners and accident victims: Is happiness relative? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 36: 917-927.
Bringslimark, Hartig, & Patil (2009). The psychological beneﬁts of indoor plants: A critical review of the
experimental literature. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 29(4): 422-433.
Bryant & Veroﬀ (2006). Savoring: A new model of positive experience. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Borras, Boucherie, Mohr, Lecomte, Perroud, & Huguelet (2009). Increasing self-esteem: Eﬃcacy for a group
intervention for individuals with severe mental disorders. European Psychiatry, 24: 307-316.
Bouchard & Loehlin (2001). Genes, evolution, and personality. Behavior Genetics, 31: 243-273.
Burton & King (2004). The health beneﬁts of writing about intensely positive experiences. Journal of Research in
Personality, 38: 150-163.
Bushman & Baumeister (1998). Threatened egotism, narcissism, self-esteem, and direct and displaced aggression:
Does self-love or self-hate lead to violence? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(1): 219-229.
Bushman & Baumeister (2002). Does self-love or self-hate lead to violence? Journal of Research in Personality,
36(6): 543-545.
Buunk, Oldersma, & de Dreu (2001). Enhancing satisfaction through downward comparison: The role of relational
discontent and individual diﬀerences in social comparison orientation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
37: 452-467.
Chang, Palesh, Caldwell, Glasgow, Abramson, Luskin, Gill, Burke, & Koopman (2004). The eﬀects of a mindfulness-
based stress reduction program on stress, mindfulness self-eﬃcacy, and positive states of mind. Stress and Health,
20(3): 141-147.
Chida, Steptoe, & Powell (2009). Religiosity/Spirituality and Mortality. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 78(2):
81-90.
Crocker & Park (2004). The costly pursuit of self-esteem. Psychological Bulletin, 130: 392-414.
Csikszentmihalyi (1990). Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper and Row.
Csikszentmihalyi (1998). Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement With Everyday Life. Basic Books.
Diener, Wolsic, & Fujita (1995). Physical attractiveness and subjective well-being. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69: 120-129.
Diener, Gohm, Suh, & Oishi (2000). Similarity of the relations between marital status and subjective well-being
across cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 31: 419-436.
Diener & Seligman (2002). Very happy people. Psychological Science, 13: 80-83.
Diener & Seligman (2004). Beyond money: Toward an economy of well-being. Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 5(1): 1-31.

Diener, Kesebir, & Tov (2009). Happiness. In Leary & Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of Individual Diﬀerences in Social
Behavior (pp. 147-160). New York: Guilford.
Ellis (2001). Overcoming destructive beliefs, feelings, and behaviors: New directions for Rational Emotive Behavior
Therapy. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Emmons & McCullough (2003). Counting blessings versus burdens: An experimental investigation of gratitude and
subjective well-being in daily life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84: 377-389.
Feldman & Matjasko (2005). The role of school-based extracurricular activities in adolescent development: A
comprehensive review and future directions. Review of Educational Research, 75(2), 159-210.
Felson (1989). Parents and the reﬂected appraisal process: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 56: 965-971.
Fleeson, Malanos, & Achille (2002). An intraindividual process approach to the relationship between extraversion
and positive aﬀect: is acting extraverted as "good" as being extraverted? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83(6): 1409-1422.
Floyd, Hesse, & Pauley (2009). Writing aﬀectionate letters reduces stress: replication and extension. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the NCA 95th annual convention, Chicago, IL, Nov. 11, 2009.
Fredrickson (1998). What good are positive emotions? Review of General Psychology, 2: 300-319.
Frey & Stutzer (2002). What can economists learn from happiness research? Journal of Economic Literature, 40:
402-435.
Furnham & Cheng (2000). Perceived parental behavior, self-esteem and happiness. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 35(10): 463-470.
Gardner, Csikszentmihalyi, & Damon (2002). Good Business: Leadership, Flow, and the Making of Meaning. Basic
Books.
Gilbert (2006). Stumbling on happiness. New York: Knopf.
Gottman (1984). Why marriages succeed or fail. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Gottman, Coan, Carrere, & Swanson (1998). Predicting marital happiness and stability from newlywed interactions.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 60: 5-22.
Graziano & Tobin (2009). Agreeableness. In Leary & Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of individual diﬀerences in social
behavior (pp. 46-61). New York: Guilford.
Grossman, Niemann, Schmidt, & Walach (2004). Mindfulness-based stress reduction and health beneﬁts: A meta-
analysis. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 57: 35-43.
Hagerty (2000). Social comparisons of income in one's community: Evidence from national surveys of income and
happiness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78: 746-771.
Hahlweg, Schindler, Revensdorf, & Brengelmann (1984). The Munich marital therapy study. In Hahlweg & Jacobson
(Eds.), Marital interaction: Analysis and modiﬁcation (pp. 3-26). New York: Guilford Press.
Hans (2000). A meta-analysis of the eﬀects of adventure programming on locus of control. Journal of Contemporary
Psychotherapy, 30(1): 33-60.
Harter (1998). The development of self-representations. In Eisenberg (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3.
Social, emotional, and personality development. New York: Wiley.
Hartig, Evans, Jamner, Davis, & Garling (2003). Tracking restoration in natural and urban ﬁeld settings. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 23: 109-123.
Helliwell (2011). How can subjective well-being be improved?
Heln & Singer (2008). I feel how you feel but not always: the empathic brain and its modulation. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 18(2): 153-158.
Hsee & Hastie (2005). Decision and experience: Why don't we choose what makes us happy? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 10(1): 31-37.

Inglehart (1990). Culture shift in advanced industrial society. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Isen (2002). A role for neuropsychology in understanding the facilitating inﬂuence of positive aﬀect on social
behavior and cognitive processes. In Snyder & Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 528-540). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Isen (2004). Some perspectives on positive feelings and emotions: Positive aﬀect facilitates thinking and problem
solving. In Manstead, Frijda, & Fischer (Eds.), Feelings and emotions: The Amsterdam symposium (pp. 263-281).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Isen, Daubman, & Nowicki (1987). Positive aﬀect facilitates creative problemsolving. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 52: 1122-1131.
Jacobson, Schmaling, & Holtzworth-Monroe (1987). Component analysis of behavioral marital therapy: 2-year
follow-up and prediction of relapse. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 13: 187-195.
Johnson & Krueger (2006). "How money buys happiness: Genetic and environmental processes linking ﬁnances and
life satisfaction." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90: 680-691.
Judge & Klinger (2008). Job satisfaction: Subjective well-being at work. In Eid & Larsen (Eds.), The science of
subjective well-being (pp. 393-413). New York: Guilford.
Kabat-Zinn (1982). An outpatient program in behavioral medicine for chronic pain patients based on the practice of
mindfulness meditation: Theoretical considerations and preliminary results. General Hospital Psychiatry, 4: 33-47.
Kahneman, Krueger, Schkade, Schwarz, & Stone (2006). "Would you be happier if you were richer? A focusing
illusion."Science, 312: 1908-1910.
Kaplan (1993). The role of nature in the context of the workplace. Landscaping and Urban Planning, 26: 193-201.
Kaplan (2001). The nature of the view from home: Psychological beneﬁts. Environment and Behavior, 33(4): 507-
542.
Kasser (2002). The high prices of materialism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kasser, Ryan, Couchman, & Sheldon (2004). Materialistic values: Their causes and consequences. In Kasser &
Kanner (Eds.), Psychology and consumer culture: The struggle for a good life in a materialistic world. Washington
DC: American Psychological Association.
Langer & Rodin (1976). The eﬀects of choice and enhanced personal responsibility for the aged: A ﬁeld experiment
in an institutional setting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol 34(2): 191-198.
Lee, Cohen, Edgar, Laizner, & Gagnon (2006). Meaning-making intervention during breast or colorectal cancer
treatment improves self-esteem, optimism, and self-eﬃcacy. Social Science & Medicine, 62(12): 3133-3145.
Lepore & Smyth, eds. (2002). The writing cure: How expressive writing promotes health and emotional well-being.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lindsley, Brass, & Thomas (1995). Eﬃcacy-performance spirals: A multilevel perspective. Academy of Management
Review, 20(3): 645-678.
Lucas (2008). Personality and subjective well-being. In Eid & Larsen (Eds.), The science of subjective well-
being (pp. 171-194). New York: Guilford.
Lucas & Diener (2008). Personality and subjective well-being. In John, Robins, & Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of
personality: Theory and research, 3rd ed. (pp. 795-814). New York: Guilford.
Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, & Schkade (2005). Pursuing happiness: The architecture of sustainable change. Review of
General Psychology, 9(2), 111-131.
Lyubomirsky, Tkach, & DiMatteo (2006). What are the diﬀerences between happiness and self-esteem? Social
Indicators Research, 78: 363-404.
Lyubomirsky, King, & Diener (2005). The beneﬁts of frequent positive aﬀect: Does happiness lead to success?
Psychological Bulletin, 131: 803-855.
Lykken & Tellegen (1996). Happiness is a stochastic phenomenon. Psychological Science, 7: 186-189.

Lykken (1999). Happiness: The nature and nurture of joy and contentment. New York: St. Martin's.
McNeil & Fleeson (2006). The causal eﬀect of extraversion on positive aﬀect and neuroticism on negative aﬀect:
Manipulating state extraversion and state neuroticism in an experimental approach. Journal of Research in
Personality, 40: 529-550.
Morris (1999). The mood system. In Kahneman, Diener, & Schwatrz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic
psychology (pp. 169-189). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Murray & Holmes (1999). The (mental) ties that bind: Cognitive structures that predict relationship resilience.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77: 1228-1244.
Myers (1992). The pursuit of happiness: Who is happy, and why. New York: Morrow.
Myers (1999). Close relationships and quality of life. In Kahnemann, Diener, & Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology. New York: Sage.
Myers & Diener (1995). Who is happy? Psychological Science, 6: 10-19.
Myers & Diener (1997). The pursuit of happiness. Scientiﬁc American, Special Issue 7: 40-43.
Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi (2009). Flow theory and research. In Lopez & Snyder (Eds.), Oxford handbook of
positive psychology (2nd ed., pp. 195-206). New York: Oxford.
Nickerson, Schwartz, Diener, & Kahnemann (2003). Zeroing in on the dark side of the American dream: A closer
look at the negative consequences of the goal for ﬁnancial success. Psychological Science, 14(6): 531-536.
Park & Folkman (1997). Meaning in the context of stress and coping. Review of General Psychology, 1: 115-144.
Peterson (2006). A primer on positive psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Peterson & Seligman (2004). Character strengths and virtues: A Handbook of classiﬁcation. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Price (2008). Research roundup: Get out of town. gradPSYCH, 6(3): 10.
Pronin & Jacobs (2008). Thought speed, mood, and the experience of mental motion. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 3: 461-485.
Proulx, Helms, & Cheryl (2007). Marital quality and personal well-being: A meta-analysis. Journal of Marriage and
Family, 69: 576-593.
Reker, Peacock, & Wong (1987). Meaning and purpose in life and well-being: a life-span perspective. The Journal of
Gerontology, 42(1): 44-49.
Riis, Loewenstein, Baron, Jepson, Fagerlin, & Ubel (2005). Ignorance of hedonic adaptation to hemodialysis: A study
using ecological momentary assessment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134: 3-9.
Roberts, Jackson, Fayard, Edmonds, & Meints (2009). Conscientiousness. In Leary & Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of
individual diﬀerences in social behavior (pp. 369-381). New York: Guilford.
Ross & Van Willigen (1997). Education and the subjective quality of life. Journal of Health & Social Behavior, 38:
275-297.
Schwartz & Strack (1999). Reports of subjective well-being: Judgmental processes and their methodological
implications. In Kahneman, Diener, & Schwartz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Seery, Silver, Holman, Ence, & Chu (2008). Expressing thoughts and feelings following a collective trauma:
Immediate responses to 9/11 predict negative outcomes in a national sample. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 76(4): 657-667.
Shapiro, Schwartz, & Bonner (1998). The eﬀects of mindfulness-based stress reduction on medical and pre-medical
students. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 21: 581-599.
Solberg, Diener, Wirtz, Lucas, & Oishi (2002). Wanting, having, and satisfaction: Examining the role of desire
discrepancies in satisfaction with income. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(3): 725-734.

Spera, Buhrfeind, & Pennebaker (1994). Expressive writing and coping with job loss. Academy of Management
Journal, 3: 72-733.
Stepien & Baernstein (2006). Educating for empaty: a review. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 21(5): 524-530.
Steptoe, Wardle, & Marmot (2005). Positive aﬀect and health-related neuroendocrine, cardiovascular, and
inﬂammatory processes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
102(18): 6508-6512.
Stubbe, Posthuma, Boomsa, & De Geus (2005). Heritability and life satisfaction in adults: A twin-family
study. Psychological Medicine, 35: 1581-1588.
Tennessen & Cimprich (1995). Views to nature: Eﬀects on attention. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 15: 77-
85.
Ulmer, Range, & Smith (1991). Purpose in life: a moderator of recovery from bereavement. Journal of Death and
Dying, 23(4): 279-289.
Van Boven (2005). Experientialism, materialism, and the pursuit of happiness. Review of General Psychology, 9(2):
132-142.
de Vignemont & Singer (2006). The empathic brain: how, when, and why? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(10):
435-441.
Warr (1999). Well-being and the workplace. In Kahneman, Diener, & Schwartz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of
hedonic psychology. New York: Sage.
Wegner (1989). White bears and other unwanted thoughts: Suppression, obsession, and the psychology of mental
control. New York: Viking.
Weiss, Bates, & Luciano (2008). Happiness is a personal(ity) thing. Psychology Science, 19: 205-210.
Wilson & Gilbert (2005). Aﬀective forecasting: Knowing what to want. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
14: 131-134.
Wissink, Dekovic, & Meijer (2006). Parenting behavior, quality of the parent-adolescent relationship, and adolescent
functioning in four ethnic groups. Journal of Early Adolescence, 26: 133-159.
Zech & Rimé (2005). Is talking about an emotional experience helpful? Eﬀects on emotional recovery and
perceived beneﬁts. Clinical Psychology and Psychotehrapy, 12: 270-287.

The Good News of Situationist
Psychology
Part of the sequence: The Science of Winning at Life
In 1961, Stanley Milgram began his famous obedience experiments. He found that
ordinary people would deliver (what they believed to be) excruciatingly painful electric
shocks to another person if instructed to do so by an authority ﬁgure. Milgram claimed
these results showed that in certain cases, people are more heavily inﬂuenced by
their situation than by their internal character.
Fifty years and hundreds of studies later, this kind of situationism is widely accepted
for broad domains of human action. People can inﬂict incredible cruelties upon each
other in a prison simulation.b Hurried passersby step over a stricken person in their
path, while unhurried passersby stop to help.a Willingness to help varies with the
number of bystanders, and with proximity to a fragrant bakery or cofee shop.c The list
goes on and on.d
Our inability to realize how powerful the eﬀect situation has on human action is so
well-known that it has a name. Our tendency to over-value trait-based explanations of
others' behavior and under-value situation-based explanations of their behavior is
called the fundamental attribution error (aka correspondence bias).
Recently, some have worried that this understanding undermines the traditional
picture we have of ourselves as stable persons with robust characteristics. How can
we trust others if their unpredictable situation may have so powerful an eﬀect that it
overwhelms the eﬀect of their virtuous character traits?
But as I see it, situationist psychology is wonderful news, for it means we can change!
If situation has a powerful eﬀect on behavior, then we have signiﬁcant powers to
improve our own behavior. It would be much worse to discover that our behavior was
almost entirely determined by traits we were born with and cannot control.
For example, drug addicts can be more successful in beating addiction if they change
their peer group - if they stop spending recreational time with other addicts, and
spend time with drug-free people instead, or in a treatment environment.e
 
Improving rationality
What about improving your rationality? Situationist psychology suggests it may be
wise to surround yourself with fellow rationalists. Having now been a visiting fellow
with the Singularity Institute for only two days, I can already tell that almost everyone
I've met who is with the Singularity Institute or has been through its visiting fellows
program is a level or two above me - not just in knowledge about Friendly AI and
simulation arguments and so on, but in day-to-day rationality skills.
It's fascinating to take part in a conversation with really trained rationalists. It might
go something like this:

Person One: "I suspect that P, though I know that cognitive bias A and B and C are
probably inﬂuencing me here. However, I think that evidence X and Y oﬀer fairly
strong support for P."
Person Two: "But what about Z? This provides evidence against P because blah
blah blah..."
Person One: "Huh. I hadn't thought that. Well, I'm going to downshift my
probability that P."
Person Three: "But what about W? The way Schmidhuber argues is this: blah blah
blah."
Person One: "No, that doesn't work because blah blah blah."
Person Three: "Hmmm. Well, I have a lot of confusion and uncertainty about that."
This kind of thing can go on for hours, and not just on abstract subjects like simulation
arguments, but also on more personal issues like fears and dreams and dating.
I've had several of these many-hours-long group conversations already - people
arguing vigorously, often 'trashing' others' views (with logic and evidence), but with
everybody apparently willing to update their beliefs, nobody getting mad or hurt, and
people even making decisions to change something in their life in response to a
Bayesian update about something.
The community norms reinforce this behavior, and it has had an obvious eﬀect. All
these people have spent time living with at least two other rationalists for many
months - most of them, for longer than that. I haven't done an experiment that allows
causal inference, but... community seems to be working splendidly for improving
rationality. And situationist psychology explains why.
 
Conclusion
Want to change your behavior, your self? In many cases, one of the most eﬀective
things you can do is to change your situation.
Live with rationalists. Stop hanging out with downward-spiral, drug-abusing friends.
Move to another state or province or nation. Get a diﬀerent job. Spend more time at
the park, less time at home. Or less time at the park, and more at home. Consider
what you want to achieve, and how a change of situation might help you do that. Then
change your situation, and change yourself.
 
Next post: The Power of Reinforcement
Previous post: How to Be Happy
 
 

Notes
a Darley & Batson (1973).
b Zimbardo et al. (1973).
c Baron (1997).
d Much of the literature is helpfully reviewed in Doris (2005).
e Velasquez et al. (2001); Connors et al. (2004, ch. 6.); Galanter (2010).
 
References
Baron (1997). The sweet smell of... helping: Eﬀects of pleasant ambient fragrance on prosocial behavior in
shopping malls. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23: 498-503.
Connors, Donovan, & DiClemente (2004). Substance abuse treatment and stages of change: Selecting and
planning interventions. Guilford.
Darley & Batson (1973). From Jerusalem to Jericho: a study of situational and dispositional variables in helping
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 27: 100-108.
Doris (2005). Lack of Character. Cambridge University Press.
Galanter (2010). Network therapy. In Marc Galanter and Herbert Kleber (eds.), Psychotherapy for the treatment of
substance abuse (pp. 249-276). American Psychiatric.
Velasquez, Maurer, Crouch, & DiClemente (2001). Group Treatment for Substance Abuse: A Stages-of-Change
Therapy Manual. Guilford.
Zimbardo, Banks, Haney, & Jaﬀee (1973). The mind is a formidable jailer: a pirandellian prison. New York Times
Magazine, April 8, 1973, pp. 38-60.

The Power of Reinforcement
Part of the sequence: The Science of Winning at Life
Also see: Basics of Animal Reinforcement, Basics of Human Reinforcement, Physical and Mental Behavior, Wanting
vs. Liking Revisited, Approving reinforces low-eﬀort behaviors, Applying Behavioral Psychology on Myself.
 
Story 1:
On Skype with Eliezer, I said: "Eliezer, you've been unusually pleasant these past
three weeks. I'm really happy to see that, and moreover, it increases my probability
than an Eliezer-led FAI research team will work. What caused this change, do you
think?"
Eliezer replied: "Well, three weeks ago I was working with Anna and Alicorn, and every
time I said something nice they fed me an M&M."
 
Story 2:
I once witnessed a worker who hated keeping a work log because it was only used
"against" him. His supervisor would call to say "Why did you spend so much time on
that?" or "Why isn't this done yet?" but never "I saw you handled X, great job!" Not
surprisingly, he often "forgot" to ﬁll out his worklog.
Ever since I got everyone at the Singularity Institute to keep work logs, I've tried to
avoid connections between "concerned" feedback and staﬀ work logs, and instead
take time to comment positively on things I see in those work logs.
 
Story 3:
Chatting with Eliezer, I said, "Eliezer, I get the sense that I've inadvertently caused
you to be slightly averse to talking to me. Maybe because we disagree on so many
things, or something?"
Eliezer's reply was: "No, it's much simpler. Our conversations usually run longer than
our previously set deadline, so whenever I ﬁnish talking with you I feel drained and
slightly cranky."
Now I ﬁnish our conversations on time.
 
Story 4:
A major Singularity Institute donor recently said to me: "By the way, I decided that
every time I donate to the Singularity Institute, I'll set aside an additional 5% for
myself to do fun things with, as a motivation to donate."

The power of reinforcement
It's amazing to me how consistently we fail to take advantage of the power of
reinforcement.
Maybe it's because behaviorist techniques like reinforcement feel like they don't
respect human agency enough. But if you aren't treating humans more like animals
than most people are, then you're modeling humans poorly.
You are not an agenty homunculus "corrupted" by heuristics and biases. You just
are heuristics and biases. And you respond to reinforcement, because most of your
motivation systems still work like the motivation systems of other animals.
 
A quick reminder of what you learned in high school
A reinforcer is anything that, when it occurs in conjunction with an act, increases
the probability that the act will occur again.
A positive reinforcer is something the subject wants, such as food, petting, or
praise. Positive reinforcement occurs when a target behavior is followed by
something the subject wants, and this increases the probability that the
behavior will occur again.
A negative reinforcer is something the subject wants to avoid, such as a blow, a
frown, or an unpleasant sound. Negative reinforcement occurs when a target
behavior is followed by some relief from something the subject doesn't want,
and this increases the probability that the behavior will happen again.
 
What works
1. Small reinforcers are ﬁne, as long as there is a strong correlation between
the behavior and the reinforcer (Schneider 1973; Todorov et al. 1984). All else
equal, a large reinforcer is more eﬀective than a small one (Christopher 1988;
Ludvig et al. 2007; Wolfe 1936), but the more you increase the reinforcer
magnitude, the less beneﬁt you get from the increase (Frisch & Dickinson 1990).
2. The reinforcer should immediately follow the target behavior (Escobar &
Bruner 2007; Schlinger & Blakely 1994; Schneider 1990). Pryor (2007) notes that
when the reward is food, small bits (like M&Ms) are best because they can be
consumed instantly instead of being consumed over an extended period of time.
3. Any feature of a behavior can be strengthened (e.g., its intensity,
frequency, rate, duration, persistence, its shape or form), so long as a reinforcer
can be made contingent on that particular feature (Neuringer 2002).
 
Example applications
If you want someone to call you, then when they do call, don't nag them about
how they never call you. Instead, be engaging and positive.

When trying to maintain order in a class, ignore unruly behavior and praise good
behavior (Madsen et al. 1968; McNamara 1987).
Reward originality to encourage creativity (Pryor et al. 1969; Chambers et al.
1977; Eisenberger & Armeli 1997; Eisenberger & Rhoades 2001).
If you want students to understand the material, don't get excited when they
guess the teacher's password but instead when they demonstrate a technical
understanding.
To help someone improve at dance or sport, ignore poor performance but reward
good performance immediately, for example by shouting "Good!" (Buzas &
Allyon 1981) The reason you should ignore poor performance if you say "No,
you're doing it wrong!" you are inadvertently punishing the eﬀort. A better
response to a mistake would be to reinforce the eﬀort: "Good eﬀort! You're
almost there! Try once more." 
Reward honesty to help people be more honest with you (Lanza et al 1982).
Reward opinion-expressing to get people to express their opinions more often
(Verplanck 1955).
You may even be able to reinforce-away annoying involuntary behaviors, such as
twitches (Laurenti-Lions et al. 1985) or vomiting (Wolf et al. 1965).
Want a young infant to learn to speak more quickly? Reinforce their attempts at
vocalization (Ramely & Finkelstein 1978).
More training should occur via video games like DragonBox, because computer
programs can easily provide instant reinforcement many times a minute for very
speciﬁc behaviors (Fletcher-Flinn & Gravatt 1995).
For additional examples and studies, see The Power of Reinforcement (2004), Don't
Shoot the Dog (2006), and Learning and Behavior (2008).
 
I close with Story 5, from Amy Sutherland:
For a book I was writing about a school for exotic animal trainers, I started
commuting from Maine to California, where I spent my days watching students do
the seemingly impossible: teaching hyenas to pirouette on command, cougars to
oﬀer their paws for a nail clipping, and baboons to skateboard.
I listened, rapt, as professional trainers explained how they taught dolphins to ﬂip
and elephants to paint. Eventually it hit me that the same techniques might work
on that stubborn but lovable species, the American husband.
The central lesson I learned from exotic animal trainers is that I should reward
behavior I like and ignore behavior I don't. After all, you don't get a sea lion to
balance a ball on the end of its nose by nagging. The same goes for the American
husband.
Back in Maine, I began thanking Scott if he threw one dirty shirt into the hamper.
If he threw in two, I'd kiss him. Meanwhile, I would step over any soiled clothes on
the ﬂoor without one sharp word, though I did sometimes kick them under the
bed. But as he basked in my appreciation, the piles became smaller.
I was using what trainers call "approximations," rewarding the small steps toward
learning a whole new behavior...
Once I started thinking this way, I couldn't stop. At the school in California, I'd be
scribbling notes on how to walk an emu or have a wolf accept you as a pack

member, but I'd be thinking, "I can't wait to try this on Scott."
...After two years of exotic animal training, my marriage is far smoother, my
husband much easier to love.
 
Next post: Rational Romantic Relationships Part 1
Previous post: The Good News of Situationist Psychology
 
 
My thanks to Erica Edelman for doing much of the research for this post.

Rational Romantic Relationships, Part
1: Relationship Styles and Attraction
Basics
Part of the Sequence: The Science of Winning at Life. Co-authored with Minda Myers and Hugh Ristik. Also see:
Polyhacking.
When things fell apart between me (Luke) and my ﬁrst girlfriend, I decided that kind of
relationship wasn't ideal for me.
I didn't like the jealous feelings that had arisen within me. I didn't like the desperate,
codependent 'madness' that popular love songs celebrate. I had moral objections to
the idea of owning somebody else's sexuality, and to the idea of somebody else
owning mine. Some of my culture's scripts for what a man-woman relationship should
look like didn't ﬁt my own goals very well.
I needed to design romantic relationships that made sense (decision-theoretically) for
me, rather than simply falling into whatever relationship model my culture happened
to oﬀer. (The ladies of Sex and the City weren't too good with decision theory, but
they certainly invested time ﬁguring out which relationship styles worked for them.)
For a while, this new approach led me into a series of short-lived ﬂings. After that, I
chose 4 months of contented celibacy. After that, polyamory. After that...
Anyway, the results have been wonderful. Rationality and decision theory work for
relationships, too!
We humans compartmentalize by default. Brains don't automatically enforce belief
propagation, and aren't conﬁgured to do so. Cached thoughts and cached selves can
remain even after one has applied the lessons of the core sequences to particular
parts of one's life. That's why it helps to explicitly examine what happens when you
apply rationality to new areas of your life — from disease to goodness to morality.
Today, we apply rationality to relationships.
 
Relationships Styles
When Minda had her ﬁrst relationship with a woman, she found that the cultural
scripts for heterosexual relationships didn't work for a homosexual relationship style.
For example, in heterosexual dating (in the USA) the man is expected to ask for the
date, plan the date, and escalate sexual interaction. A woman expects that she will be
pursued and not have to approach men, that on a date she should be passive and
follow the man's lead, and that she shouldn't initiate sex herself.
In the queer community, Minda quickly found that if she passively waited for a woman
to hit on her, she'd be waiting all night! When she met her ﬁrst girlfriend, Minda had
to ask for the date. Minda writes:
On dates, I didn't know if I should pay for the date or hold the door or what I was
supposed to do! Each interaction required thought and negotiation that hadn't
been necessary before. And this was really kind of neat. We had the opportunity to

create a relationship that worked for us and represented us as unique and
individual human beings. And when it came to sexual interactions, I found it easy
to ask for and engage in exactly what I wanted. And I have since brought these
practices into my relationships with men. 
But you don't need to have an 'alternative' relationship in order to decide you want to
set aside some cultural scripts and design a relationship style that works for you. You
can choose relationship styles that work for you now.
With regard to which type(s) of romantic partner(s) you want, there are many
possibilities.
No partners:
Asexuality. Asexuals don't experience sexual attraction. They comprise perhaps
1% of the population,1 and include notables like Paul Erdos, Morrissey, and
Janeane Garofalo. There is a network (AVEN) for asexuality awareness and
acceptance.
Celibacy. Celibates feel sexual attraction, but abstain from sex. Some choose to
abstain for medical, ﬁnancial, psychological, or philosophical reasons. Others
choose celibacy so they have more time to achieve other goals, as I (Luke) did
for a time. Others are involuntarily celibate; perhaps they can't ﬁnd or attract
suitable mates. This problem can often be solved by learning and practicing
social skills.
One partner:
Monogamy. Having one sexual partner at a time is a standard cultural script,
and may be over-used due to the status quo bias. Long-term monogamy should
not be done on the pretense that attraction and arousal for one's partner won't
fade. It will.2 Still, there may be many people for whom monogamy is optimal. 
Many partners:
Singlehood. Singlehood can be a good way to get to know yourself and
experience a variety of short-term partners. About 78% of college students have
had at least one 'one-night stand', and most such encounters were preceded by
alcohol or drug use.3 Indeed, many young people today no longer go on 'dates'
to get to know a potential partner. Instead, they meet each other at a social
event, 'hook up', and then go on dates (if the hookup went well).4
Friendship 'with beneﬁts'. Friends are often people you already enjoy and
respect, and thus may also make excellent sexual partners. According to one
study, 60% of undergraduates have been a 'friend with beneﬁts' for someone at
one time.5
Polyamory.6 In a polyamorous relationship, partners are clear about their
freedom to pursue multiple partners. Couples communicate their boundaries and
make agreements about what is and isn't allowed. Polyamory often requires
partners to de-program jealousy. In my experience, polyamory is much more
common in the rationality community than in the general population.
Hugh points out that your limbic system may not agree (at least initially) with your
cognitive choice of a relationship style. Some women say they want a long-term
relationship but date 'bad boys' who are unlikely to become long-term mates.

Someone may think they want polyamorous relationships but ﬁnd it impossible to
leave jealousy behind.7
 
The Science of Attraction
A key skillset required for having the relationships you want is that of building and
maintaining attraction in potential mates.
Guys seeking girls may wonder: Why do girls say they want "nice guys" but date only
"jerks"? Girls seeking rationalist guys are at an advantage because the gender ratio
lies in their favor, but they still might wonder: What can I do to attract the
best mates? Those seeking same-sex partners may wonder how attraction can diﬀer
from heterosexual norms.
How do you build and maintain attraction in others? A lot can be learned by trying
diﬀerent things and seeing what works. This is often better than polling people,
because people's verbal reports about what attracts them don't always match their
actual behavior.8
To get you started, the virtues of scholarship and empiricism will serve you well. Social
psychology has a wealth of knowledge to oﬀer on successful relationships.9 For
example, here are some things that, according to the latest research, will tend to
make people more attracted to you:
Proximity and familiarity. Study after study shows that we tend to like those who
live near us, partly due to availability,10 and partly because repeated exposure
to almost anything increases liking.11 A Taiwanese man once demonstrated the
power of proximity and repeated exposure when he wrote over 700 letters to his
girlfriend, urging her to marry him. She married the mail carrier.12
Similarity. We tend to like people who are similar to us.13 We like people with
faces similar to our own.14 We are even more likely to marry someone with a
similar-sounding name.15 Similarity makes attraction endure longer.16 Also,
similar people are more likely to react to events the same way, thus reducing
the odds of conﬂict.17
Physical attractiveness. Both men and women prefer good-looking
mates.18 Partly, this is because the halo eﬀect: we automatically assume that
more attractive people are also healthier, happier, more sensitive, more
successful, and more socially skilled (but not necessarily more honest or
compassionate).19 Some of these assumptions are correct: Attractive and well-
dressed people are more likely to impress employers and succeed
occupationally.20 But isn't beauty relative? Some standards of beauty vary from
culture to culture, but many are universal.21 Men generally prefer women who
exhibit signs of youth and fertility.22 Women generally prefer men who (1)
display possession of abundant resources,23 (2) display high social status,24 (3)
exhibit a 'manly' face (large jaw, thick eyebrows, visible beard stubble)25 and
physique,26 and (4) are tall.27 Both genders generally prefer (1) agreeableness,
conscientiousness, and extraversion,28 (2) 'average' and symmetrical faces with
features that are neither unusually small or large,29 (2) large smiles,30 (3) pupil
dilation,31 and some other things (more on this later).

Liking others. Liking someone makes them more attracted to you.32
Arousing others. Whether aroused by fright, exercise, stand-up comedy, or
erotica, we are more likely to be attracted to an attractive person when we are
generally aroused than when we are not generally aroused.33 As David Myers
writes, "Adrenaline makes the heart grow fonder."34 This may explain why
rollercoasters and horror movies are such a popular date night choice.
But this barely scratches the surface of attraction science. In a later post, we'll
examine how attraction works in more detail, and draw up a science-supported game
plan for building attraction in others.
 
Attractiveness: Mean and Variance
Remember that increasing your average attractiveness (by appealing to more people)
may not be an optimal strategy.
Marketers know that it's often better to sacriﬁce broad appeal in order for a product to
have very strong appeal to a niche market. The Appunto doesn't appeal to most men,
but it appeals strongly enough to some men that they are willing to pay the
outrageous $200 price for it.
Similarly, you may have the best success in dating if you appeal very strongly to
some people, even if this makes you less appealing to most people — that is, if you
adopt a niche marketing strategy in the dating world.35
As long as you can ﬁnd those few people who ﬁnd you very attractive, it won't matter
(for dating) that most people aren't attracted to you. And because one can switch
between niche appeal and broad appeal using fashion and behavior, you can simply
use clothing and behavior with mainstream appeal during the day (to have general
appeal in professional environments) and use alternative clothing and behavior when
you're socializing (to have strong appeal to a small subset of people whom you've
sought out).
To visualize this point, consider two attraction strategies. Both strategies employ
phenomena that are (almost) universally attractive, but the blue strategy aims to
maximize the frequency of somewhat positive responses while the red strategy aims
to maximize the frequency of highly positive responses. The red strategy (e.g.
using mainstream fashion) increases one's mean attractiveness, while the blue
strategy (e.g. using alternative fashion) increases one's attractiveness variance. Hugh
Ristik oﬀers the following chart:
This goth guy and I (Luke) can illustrate this phenomenon. I aim for mainstream
appeal; he wears goth clothing when socializing. My mainstream look turns oﬀ almost
no one, and is attractive to most women, but doesn't get that many strong reactions
right away unless I employ other high-variance strategies.36 In contrast, I would bet
the goth guy's alternative look turns oﬀ many people and is less attractive to most
women than my look is, but has a higher frequency of extremely positive reactions in
women.
In one's professional life, it may be better to have broad appeal. But in dating, the
goal is to ﬁnd people who ﬁnd you extremely attractive. The goth guy sacriﬁces his

mean attractiveness to increase his attractiveness variance (and thus the frequency
of very positive responses), and this works well for him in the dating scene.
High-variance strategies like this are a good way to ﬁlter for people who are strongly
attracted to you, and thus avoid wasting your time with potential mates who only feel
lukewarm toward you.
 
Up next
In future posts we'll develop an action plan for using the science of attraction to
create successful romantic relationships. We'll also explain how rationality helps with
relationship maintenance37 and relationship satisfaction.
 
Previous post: The Power of Reinforcement
 
 
Notes
1 Bogaert (2004).
2 About half of romantic relationships of all types end within a few years (Sprecher 1994; Kirkpatrick & Davis 1994; Hill et al 1976), and
even relationships that last exhibit diminishing attraction and arousal (Aron et al. 2006; Kurdek 2005; Miller et al. 2007). Note that even if
attraction and arousal fades, romantic love can exist in long-term closed monogamy and it is associated with relationship satisfaction
(Acevedo & Aron, 2009).
3 Paul et al. (2000); Grello et al. (2006).
4 Bogle (2008).
5 Bisson & Levine (2009).
6 Two introductory books on the theory and practice of polyamory are: Easton & Hardy (2009) and Taormino (2008).
7 See work on 'conditional mating strategies' aka 'strategic pluralism' (Gangestad & Simpson, 2000).
8 Sprecher & Felmlee (2008); Eastwick & Finkel (2008). Likewise, there is a diﬀerence between what people publicly
report as being the cause of a breakup, what they actually think caused a breakup, and what actually caused a
breakup (Powell & Fine, 2009). Also see Inferring Our Desires.
9 For overviews of this research, see: Bradbury & Karney (2010); Miller & Perlman (2008); Vangelisti & Perlman (2006); Sprecher et al.
(2008); Weiten et al. (2011), chs. 8-12. For a history of personal relationships research, see Perlman & Duck (2006).
10 Goodfriend (2009).
11 This is called the mere exposure eﬀect. See Le (2009); Moreland & Zajonc (1982); Nuttin (1987); Zajonc (1968, 2001); Moreland &
Beach (1992). The limits of this eﬀect are explored in Bornstein (1989, 1999); Swap (1977).
12 Steinberg (1993).
13 Zajonc (1998); Devine (1995); Rosenbaum (1986); Surra et al. (2006); Morry (2007, 2009); Peplau & Fingerhut (2007); Ledbetter et al.
(2007); Montoya et al. (2008); Simpson & Harris (1994).
14 DeBruine (2002, 2004); Bailenson et al. (2005).

15 Jones et al. (2004).
16 Byrne (1971); Ireland et al. (2011).
17 Gonzaga (2009). For an overview of the research on self-disclosure, see Greene et al. (2006).
18 Langlois et al. (2000); Walster et al. (1966); Feingold (1990); Woll (1986); Belot & Francesconi (2006); Finkel &
Eastwick (2008); Neﬀ (2009); Peretti & Abplanalp (2004); Buss et al. (2001); Fehr (2009); Lee et al. (2008); Reis et
al. (1980). This is also true for homosexuals: Peplau & Spalding (2000). Even infants prefer attractive faces: Langlois
et al. (1987); Langlois et al. (1990); Slater et al. (1998). Note that women report that the physical attractiveness is less important to their
mate preferences than it actually is: Sprecher (1989).
19 Eagly et al. (1991); Feingold (1992a); Hatﬁeld & Sprecher (1986); Smith et al. (1999); Dion et al. (1972).
20 Cash & Janda (1984); Langlois et al. (2000); Solomon (1987).
21 Cunningham et al. (1995); Cross & Cross (1971); Jackson (1992); Jones (1996); Thakerar & Iwawaki (1979).
22 Men certainly prefer youth (Buss 1989a; Kenrick & Keefe 1992; Kenrick et al. 1996; Ben Hamida et al. 1998). Signs of fertility that men
prefer include clear and smooth skin (Sugiyama 2005; Singh & Bronstad 1997; Fink & Neave 2005; Fink et al. 2008; Ford & Beach 1951;
Symons 1995), facial femininity (Cunningham 2009; Gangestad & Scheyd 2005; Schaefer et al. 2006; Rhodes 2006), long legs (Fielding et
al. 2008; Sorokowski & Pawlowski 2008; Bertamini & Bennett 2009; Swami et al. 2006), and a low waist-to-hip ratio (Singh 1993, 2000;
Singh & Young 1995; Jasienska et al. 2004; Singh & Randall 2007; Connolly et al 2000; Furnham et al 1997; Franzoi & Herzog 1987; Grabe
& Samson 2010). Even men blind from birth prefer a low waist-to-hip ratio (Karremans et al. 2010).
23 Buss et al. (1990); Buss & Schmitt (1993); Khallad (2005); Gottschall et al. (2003); Gottschall et al. (2004); Kenrick et al. (1990);
Gustavsson & Johnsson (2008); Wiederman (1993); Badahdah & Tiemann (2005); Marlowe (2004); Fisman et al. (2006); Asendorpf et al.
(2010); Bokek-Cohen et al. (2007); Pettay et al. (2007); Goode (1996).
24 Feingold (1990, 1992b).
25 Cunningham (2009); Cunningham et al. (1990).
26 Singh (1995); Martins et al. (2007).
27 Lynn & Shurgot (1984); Ellis (1992); Gregor (1985); Kurzban & Weeden (2005); Swami & Furnham (2008). In contrast, men prefer
women who are about 4.5 inches shorter than themselves: Gillis & Avis (1980).
28 Figueredo et al. (2006).
29 Langlois & Roggman (1990); Rhodes et al. (1999); Singh (1995); Thornhill & Gangestad (1994, 1999). We may
have evolved to be attracted to symmetrical faces because they predict physical and mental health (Thornhill &
Moller, 1997).
30 Cunningham (2009).
31 Cunningham (2009).
32 This is called reciprocal liking. See Curtis & Miller (1986); Aron et al (2006); Berscheid & Walster (1978); Smith & Caprariello (2009);
Backman & Secord (1959).
33 Carducci et al. (1978); Dermer & Pszczynski (1978); White & Knight (1984); Dutton & Aron (1974).
34 Myers (2010), p. 710.
35 One example of a high-variance strategy for heterosexual men in the dating context is a bold opening line like "You look familiar. Have
we had sex?" Most women will be turned oﬀ by such a line, but those who react positively are (by selection and/or by the conﬁdence of
the opening line) usually very attracted. 
36 In business, this is often said as "not everyone is your customer": 1, 2, 3.
37 For discussions of relationship maintenance in general, see: Ballard-Reisch & Wiegel (1999); Dinda & Baxter (1987); Haas & Staﬀord
(1998).
 

References
Acevedo & Aron (2009). Does a long-term relationship kill romantic love? Review of General Psychology, 13: 59-65.
Aron, Fisher, & Strong (2006). Romantic love. In Vangelisti & Perlman (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Personal
Relationships. Cambridge University Press.
Asendorpf, Penke, & Back (2010). From dating to mating and relating: Predictors of initial and long-term outcomes
of speed dating in a community sample. European Journal of Personality.
Backman & Secord (1959). The eﬀect of perceived liking on interpersonal attraction. Human Relations, 12: 379-384.
Badahdah & Tiemann (2005). Mate selection criteria among Muslims living in America. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 26: 432-440.
Bailenson, Iyengar, & Yee (2005). Facial identity capture and presidential candidate preference. Paper presented at
the Annual Conference of the International Communication Association.
Ballard-Reisch & Wiegel (1999). Communication processes in marital commitment: An integrative approach. In Adams & Jones (eds.),
Handbook of interpersonal commitment and relationship stability (pp. 407-424). Plenum.
Belot & Francesconi (2006). Can anyone be 'the one'? Evidence on mate selection from speed dating. Centre for
Economic Policy Research.
Ben Hamida, Mineka, & Bailey (1998). Sex diﬀerences in perceived controllability of mate value: An evolutionary
perspective. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75: 953-966.
Berscheid & Walster (1978). Interpersonal Attraction. Addison-Wesley.
Bertamini & Bennett (2009). The eﬀect of leg length on perceived attractiveness of simpliﬁed stimuli. Journal of
Social, Evolutionary, and Cultural Psychology, 3: 233-250.
Bogaert (2004). Asexuality: Prevalence and associated factors in a national probability sample. Journal of Sex
Research, 41: 279-287.
Bogle (2008). Hooking Up: Sex, dating, and relationships on campus. New York University Press.
Bokek-Cohen, Peres, & Kanazawa (2007). Rational choice and evolutionary psychology as explanations for mate
selectivity. Journal of Social, Evolutionary, and Cultural Psychology, 2: 42-55.
Bornstein (1989). Exposure and aﬀect: Overview and meta-analysis of research, 1968-1987. Psychological Bulletin,
106: 265-289.
Bornstein (1999). Source amnesia, misattribution, and the power of unconscious perceptions and memories.
Psychoanalytic Psychology, 16: 155-178.
Bradbury & Karney (2010). Intimate Relationships. W.W. Norton & Company.
Buss (1989). Sex diﬀerences in human mate preferences: Evolutionary hypotheses testing in 37 cultures.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 12: 1-49.
Buss & Schmitt (1993). Sexual strategies theory: An evolutionary perspective on human mating. Psychological
Review, 100: 204-232.
Buss, Abbott, Angleitner, Asherian, Biaggio, et al. (1990). International preferences in selecting mates: A study of
37 cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 21: 5-47.
Buss, Shackelford, Kirkpatrick, & Larsen (2001). A half century of mate preeferences: The cultural evolution of
values. Journal of Marriage and Family, 63: 291-503.
Byrne (1971). The Attraction Paradigm. Academic Press.
Carducci, Cosby, & Ward (1978). Sexual arousal and interpersonal evaluations. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 14: 449-457.
Cash & Janda (1984). The eye of the beholder. Psychology Today, November: 46-52.

Connolly, Mealey, & Slaughter (2000). The development of waist-to-hip ratio preferences. Perspectives in Human
Biology, 5: 19-29.
Cross & Cross (1971). Age, sex, race, and the perception of facial beauty. Developmental Psychology, 5: 433-439.
Cunningham, Roberts, Wu, Barbee, & Druen (1995). "Their ideas of beauty are, on the whole, the same as ours":
Consistency and variability in the cross-cultural perception of female attractiveness. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 68: 261-279.
Cunningham (2009). Physical Attractiveness, Deﬁning Characteristics. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of
Human Relationships, Vol. 3 (pp. 1237-1242). Sage Reference.
Curtis & Miller (1986). Believing another likes or dislikes you: Behaviors making the beliefs come true. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51: 284-290.
DeBruine (2002). Facial resemblance enhances trust. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 269: 1307-1312.
DeBruine (2004). Facial resemblance increases the attractiveness of same-sex faces more than other-sex faces.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B, 271: 2085-2090.
Dermer & Pszczynski (1978). Eﬀects of erotica upon men's loving and liking responses for women they love. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 36: 1302-1309.
Devine (1995). Prejudice and outgroup perception. In Teser (ed.), Advanced Social Psychology. McGraw-Hill.
Dinda & Baxter (1987). Strategies for maintaining and repairing marital relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 4: 143-
158.
Dion, Berscheid, & Walster (1972). What is beautiful is good. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 24: 285-290.
Dutton & Aron (1974). Some evidence for heightened sexual attraction under conditions of high anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 30: 510-517.
Eagly, Ashmore, Makhijani, & Kennedy (1991). What is beautiful is good, but...: A meta-analytic review of research
on the physical attractiveness stereotype. Psychological Bulletin, 110: 109-128.
Easton & Hardy (2009). The Ethical Slut: A Practical Guide to Polyamory, Open Relationships & Other Adventures,
2nd edition. The Celestial Arts.
Eastwick & Finkel (2008). Sex diﬀerences in mate preferences revisited: Do people know what they initially desire in a romantic partner?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94: 245-264.
Eldridge (2009). Conﬂict patterns. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of human relationships: Vol. 1 (pp. 307-
310). Sage Reference.
Ellis (1992). The evolution of sexual attraction: Evaluative mechanisms in women. In Barkow, Cosmides, & Tooby (eds.), The Adapted
Mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 267-288). Oxford University Press.
Fehr (2009). Friendship formation and development. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of Human
Relationships, Vol. 1 (pp. 706-10). Sage Reference.
Feingold (1990). Gender diﬀerences in eﬀects of physical attractiveness on romantic attraction: A comparison
across ﬁve research paradigms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59: 981-993.
Feingold (1992a). Good-looking people are not what we think. Psychological Bulletin, 111: 304-341.
Feingold (1992b). Gender diﬀerences in mate selection preferences: A test of the parental investment model. Psychological Bulletin, 116:
429-256.
Figueredo, Sefcek, & Jones (2006). The ideal romantic partner personality. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences,
41: 431-441.
Fielding, Scholling, Adab, Cheng, Lao et al. (2008). Are longer legs associated with enhanced fertility in Chinese
women? Evolution and Human Behavior, 29: 434-443.
Fink & Neave (2005). The biology of facial beauty. Internal Journal of Cosmetic Science, 27: 317-325.
Fink, Matts, Klingenberg, Kuntze, Weege, & Grammar (2008). Visual attention to variation in female skin color
distribution. Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology, 7: 155-161.

Finkel & Eastwick (2008). Speed-dating. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17: 193-197.
Fisman, Iyengar, Kamenica, & Simonson (2006). Gender diﬀerences in mate selection: Evidence from a speed
dating experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121: 673-697.
Ford & Beach (1951). Patterns of Sexual Behavior. Harper & Row.
Franzoi & Herzog (1987). Judging personal attractiveness: What body aspects do we use? Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 13: 19-33.
Furnham, Tan, & McManus (1997). Waist-to-hip ratio and preferences for body shape: A replication and extension.
Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 22: 539-549.
Gangestad & Simpson (2000). The evolution of human mating: Trade-oﬀs and strategic pluralism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23: 573-
644.
Gangestad & Scheyd (2005). The evolution of human physical attractiveness. Annual Review of Anthropology, 34:
523-548.
Gillis & Avis (1980).
Gonzaga (2009). Similarity in ongoing relationships. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of Human
Relationships, Vol. 3 (pp. 1496-1499). Sage Reference.
Goode (1996). Gender and courtship entitlement: Responses to personal ads. Sex Roles, 34: 141-169.
Goodfriend (2009). Proximity and attraction. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of Human Relationships, Vol.
3 (pp. 1297-1299). Sage Reference.
Gottschall, Berkey, Cawson, Drown, Fleischner, et al. (2003). Patterns of characterization in folktales across
geographic regions and levels of cultural complexity: Literature as a neglected source of quantitative data. Human
Nature, 14: 365-382.
Gottschall, Martin, Quish, & Rea (2004). Sex diﬀerences in mate choice criteria are reﬂected in folktales from
around the world and in historical European literature. Evolution and Human Behavior, 25: 102-112.
Grabe & Samson (2010). Sexual Cues Emanating From the Anchorette Chair: Implications for Perceived
Professionalism, Fitness for Beat, and Memory for News. Communication Research, December 14.
Greene, Derlega, Mathews (2006). Self-disclosure in personal relationships. In Vangelisti & Perlman (eds.), The
Cambridge Handbook of Personal Relationships (pp. 409-428). Cambridge University Press.
Gregor (1985). Anxious Pleasures: The sexual lives of an Amazonian people. University of Chicago Press.
Grello, Welsh, & Harper (2006). No strings attached: The nature of casual sex in college students. Journal of Sex Research, 43: 255-267.
Gustavsson & Johnsson (2008). Mixed support for sexual selection theories of mate preferences in the Swedish
population. Evolutionary Psychology, 6: 454-470.
Haas & Staﬀord (1998). An initial examination of maintenance behaviors in gay and lesbian relationships. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 15: 846-855.
Hatﬁeld & Sprecher (1986). Mirror, mirror... The importance of looks in everyday life. State University of New York
Press.
Hill, Rubin, & Peplau (1976). Breakups before marriage: The end of 103 aﬀairs. Journal of Social Issues, 32: 147-
168.
Ireland, Slatcher, Eastwick, Scissors, Finkel, & Pennebaker (2011). Language style matching predicts relationship initiation and stability.
Psychological Science, 22: 39-44.
Jackson (1992). Physical appearance and gender: Sociobiological and sociocultural perspectives. State University of
New York Press.
Jasienska, Ziomkiewicz, Ellison, Lipson, & Thune (2004). Large breasts and narrow waists indicate high reproductive
potential in women. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B, 271: 1213-1217.
Jones (1996). Physical attractiveness and the theory of sexual selection. University of Michigan Press.

Jones, Pelham, Carvallo, & Mirenberg (2004). How do I love thee? Let me count the Js: Implicit egotism and
interpersonal attraction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87: 665-683.
Karremans, Frankenhuis, & Arons (2010). Blind men prefer a low waist-to-hip ratio. Evolution and Human Behavior,
31: 182-186.
Kenrick, Sadalla, Groth, & Trost (1990). Evolution, traits, and the stages of human courtship: Qualifying the parental
investment model. Journal of Personality, 58: 97-116.
Kenrick, Keefe, Gabrielidis, & Cornelius (1996). Adolescents' age preferences for dating partners: Support for an
evolutionary model of life-history strategies. Child Development, 67: 1499-1511.
Kenrick & Keefe (1992). Age preferences in mates reﬂect sex diﬀerences in reproductive strategies. Behaivoral and
Brain Sciences, 15: 75-133.
Khallad (2005). Mate selection in Jordan: Eﬀects of sex, socio-economic status, and culture. Journal of Social and
Personal Relationships, 22: 155-168.
Kirkpatrick & Davis (1994). Attachment style, gender, and relationship stability: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 66: 502-512.
Kurdek (2005). What do we know about gay and lesbian couples? Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14:
251-254. 
Kurzban & Weeden (2005). HurryDate: Mate preferences in action. Evolution and Human Behavior, 26: 227-244.
Langlois & Roggman (1990). Attractive faces are only average. Psychological Science, 1: 115-121.
Langlois, Roggman, & Reiser-Danner (1990). Infants' diﬀerential social responses to attractive and unattractive
faces. Developmental Psychology, 26: 153-159.
Langlois, Roggman, Casey, Ritter, Riser-Danner, & Jenkins (1987). Infant preferences for attractive faces:
Rudiments of a stereotype? Developmental Psychology, 23: 363-369.
Langlois, Kalakanis, Rubenstein, Larson, Hallam, & Smoot (2000). Maxims or myths of beauty? A meta-analysis and
theoretical review. Psychological Bulletin, 126: 390-423.
Le (2009). Familiarity principle of attraction. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of Human Relationships, Vol.
1 (pp. 596-597). Sage Reference.
Ledbetter, Griﬃn, & Sparks (2007). Forecasting 'friends forever': A longitudinal investigation of sustained closeness
between friends. Personal Relationships, 14: 343-350.
Lee, Loewenstein, Ariely, Hong, & Young (2008). If I'm not hot, are you hot or not? Physical-attractiveness evaluations and dating
preferences as a function of one's own attractiveness. Psychological Science, 19: 669-577.
Lynn & Shurgot (1984). Responses to lonely hearts advertisements: Eﬀects of reported physical attractiveness,
physique, and coloration. Personal and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10: 349-357.
Marlowe (2004). Mate preferences among Hadza hunter-gatherers. Human Nature, 4: 365-376.
Martins, Tiggermann, & Kirkbride (2007). Those speedos become them: The role of self-objectiﬁcation in gay and
heterosexual men's body image. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33: 634-647.
Miller & Perlman (2008). Intimate Relationships, 5th edition. McGraw-Hill.
Montoya, Horton, & Kirchner (2008). Is actual similarity necessary for attraction? A meta-analysis of actual and
perceived similarity. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 25: 889-922.
Moreland & Beach (1992). Exposure eﬀects in the classroom: The development of aﬃnity among students. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 28: 255-276.
Moreland & Zajonc (1982). Exposure eﬀects in person perception: Familiarity, similarity, and attraction. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 18: 395-415.
Morry (2007). The attraction-similarity hypothesis among cross-sex friends: Relationship satisfactions, perceived
similarities, and self-serving perception. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 24: 117-138.

Morry (2009). Similarity principle in attraction. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of Human Relationships, Vol.
3 (pp. 1500-1504.
Myers (2010). Psychology, 9th edition. Worth Publishers.
Neﬀ (2009). Physical attractiveness, role in relationships. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of Human
Relationships, Vol. 3 (pp. 1242-1245). Sage Reference.
Nuttin (1987). Aﬀective consequences of mere ownership: The name letter eﬀect in twelve European languages.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 17: 381-402.
Paul, Wenzel, & Harvey (2000). 'Hookups': Characteristics and correlates of college students' spontaneous and
anonymous sexual experiences. Journal of Sex Research, 37: 76-88.
Peplau & Fingerhut (2007). The close relationships of lesbians and gay men. Annual Review of Psychology, 58: 405-
424.
Peplau & Spalding (2000). The close relationships of lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals. In Hendrick & Hendrick
(eds.), Close relationships: A Sourcebook. Sage.
Peretti & Abplanalp (2004). Chemistry in the college dating process: Structure and function. Social Behavior and
Personality, 32: 147-154.
Perlman & Duck (2006). The seven seas of the study of personal relationships: From "the thousand islands" to
interconnected waterways. In Vangelisti & Perlman (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Personal Relationships (pp.
11-34). Cambridge University Press.
Pettay, Helle, Jokela, & Lummaa (2007). Natural selection on female life-history traits in relation to socio-economic
class in pre-industrial human populations. Plos ONE, July: 1-9.
Powell & Fine (2009). Dissolution of relationships, causes. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of Human
Relationships: Vol. 1 (pp. 436-440). Sage Reference.
Reis, Nezlek, & Wheeler (1980). Physical attractiveness in social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38: 604-617.
Rhodes, Sumich, & Byatt (1999). Are average facial conﬁgurations attractive only because of their symmetry?
Psychological Science, 10: 52-58.
Rhodes (2006). The evolutionary psychology of facial beauty. Annual Review of Psychology, 57: 199-226.
Rosenbaum (1986). The repulsion hypothesis: On the nondevelopment of relationships. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 51: 1156-1166.
Schaefer, Fink, Grammar, Mitteroecker, Gunz, & Bookstein (2006). Female appearance: Facial and bodily
attractiveness as shape. Psychology Science, 48: 187-205.
Simpson & Harris (1994). Interpersonal attraction. In Weber & Harvey (eds.), Perspective on close relationships (pp. 45-66). Allyn & Bacon.
Singh (1993). Adaptive signiﬁcance of waist-to-hip ratio and female physical attractiveness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 65: 293-307.
Singh (1995). Female health, attractiveness, and desirability for relationships: Role of breast asymmetry and waist-
to-hip ratio. Ethology and Sociobiology, 16: 465-481.
Singh (2000). Waist-to-hip ratio: An indicator of female mate value. International Research Center for Japanese
Studies, International Symposium 16: 79-99.
Singh & Bronstad (1997). Sex diﬀerences in the anatomical locations of human body scariﬁcation and tattooing as
a function of pathogen prevalence. Evolution and Human Behavior, 18: 403-416.
Singh & Young (1995). Body weight, waist-to-hip ratio, breasts, and hips: Role in judgments of female
attractiveness and desirability for relationships. Ethology and Sociobiology, 16: 483-507.
Singh & Randall (2007). Beauty is in the eye of the plastic surgeon: Waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) and women's
attractiveness. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 43: 329-340. 
Slater, Von der Schulenburg, Brown, Badenoch, Butterworth, Parsons, & Samuels (1998). Newborn infants prefer
attractive faces. Infant Behavior and Development, 21: 345-354.

Smith & Caprariello (2009). Liking. In Reis & Sprecher (eds.), Encyclopedia of Human Relationships, Vol. 2 (pp. 978-
982). Sage Reference.
Smith, McIntosh, & Bazzini (1999). Are the beautiful good in Hollywood? An investigation of the beauty-and-
goodness stereotype on ﬁlm. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 21: 69-80.
Solomon (1987). Standard issue. Psychology Today, November: 30-31.
Sorokowski & Pawlowski (2008). Adaptive preferences for leg length in a potential partner. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 29: 86-91.
Sprecher (1989). The importance to males and females of physical attractiveness, earning potential, and
expressiveness in initial attraction. Sex Roles, 21: 591-607.
Sprecher (1994). Two studies on the breakup of dating and relationships. Personal Relationships, 1: 199-222.
Sprecher, Wenzel, & Harvey, eds. (2008). Handbook of Relationship Initiation. Psychology Press.
Steinberg (1993). Astonishing love stories (from an earlier United Press International report). Games, February: 47.
Sugiyama (2005). Physical attractiveness in adaptationist perspective. In Buss (ed.), The handbook of evolutionary
psychology (pp. 292-342). Wiley.
Surra, Gray, Boettcher, Cottle, & West (2006). From Courtship to Universal Properties: Research on Dating and Mate
Selection, 1950 to 2003. In Vangelisti & Perlman (eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Personal Relationships. Cambridge
University Press.
Swami, Einon, & Furnham (2006). The leg-to-body ratio as a human aesthetic criterion. Body Image, 3: 317-323.
Swami & Furnham (2008).
Swap (1977). Interpersonal Attraction and Repeated Exposure to Rewarders and Punishers. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 3: 248-251.
Symons (1995). Beauty is in the adaptations of the beholder: The evolutionary psychology of human female sexual
attractiveness. In Abramson & Pinkerton (eds.), Sexual nature, sexual culture (pp. 80-118). University of Chicago
Press.
Taormino (2008). Opening Up: A Guide to Creating and Sustaining Open Relationships. Cleis Press.
Thakerar & Iwawaki (1979). Cross-cultural comparisons in interpersonal attraction of females toward males. Journal
of Social Psychology, 108: 121-122.
Thornhill & Gangestad (1994). Human ﬂuctuating asymmetry and sexual behavior. Psychological Science, 5: 292-
302.
Thornhill & Gangestad (1999). The scent of symmetry: A human sex pheromone that signals ﬁtness? Evolution and Human Behavior, 20:
175-201.
Thornhill & Moller (1997). The relative importance of size and asymmetry in sexual selection. Behavioral Ecology, 9: 546-551.
Vangelisti & Perlman (2006). The Cambridge Handbook of Personal Relationships. Cambridge University Press.
Walster, Aronson, Abrahams, & Rottman (1966). Importance of physical attractiveness in dating behavior. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 4: 508-516.
Weiten, Dunn, & Hammer (2011). Psychology Applied to Modern Life: Adjustment in the 21st Century, 10th edition.
Wadsworth Publishing.
White & Knight (1984). Misattribution of arousal and attraction: Eﬀects of salience of explanations for arousal.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 20: 55-64.
Wiederman (1993). Evolved gender diﬀerences in mate preferences: Evidence from personal advertisements.
Ethology and Sociobiology, 14: 331-352.
Woll (1986). So many to choose from: Decision strategies in videodating. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 3: 43-52.

Zajonc (1968). Attitudinal eﬀects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9: 1-27.
Zajonc (1998). Emotions. In Gilbert, Fiske, & Lindzey (eds.), Handbook of Social Psychology, 4th edition. McGraw
Hill.
Zajonc (2001). Mere exposure: A gateway to the subliminal. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 10: 224-
228.

