
Slack and the Sabbath
1. Out to Get You
2. Play in Easy Mode
3. Play in Hard Mode
4. Slack
5. Sabbath hard and go home
6. Bring Back the Sabbath
7. Sabbath Commentary
8. Confessions of a Slacker
9. Slack for your belief system
10. Sacred Cash
11. Guarding Slack vs Substance
12. The Amish, and Strategic Norms around Technology
13. Slack gives you space to notice/reﬂect on subtle things
14. My slack budget: 3 surprise problems per week
15. Slack Has Positive Externalities For Groups

Out to Get You
Epistemic Status: Reference.
Expanded From: Against Facebook, as the post originally intended.
Some things are fundamentally Out to Get You.
They seek resources at your expense. Fees are hidden. Extra options are foisted upon
you. Things are made intentionally worse, forcing you to pay to make it less worse.
Least bad deals require careful search. Experiences are not as advertised. What you
want is buried underneath stuﬀ you don't want. Everything is data to sell you
something, rather than an opportunity to help you.
When you deal with Out to Get You, you know it in your gut. Your brain cannot relax.
You lookout for tricks and traps. Everything is a scheme.
They want you not to notice. To blind you from the truth. You can feel it when you go
to work. When you go to church. When you pay your taxes. It is bad government and
bad capitalism. It is many bad relationships, groups and cultures.
When you listen to a political speech, you feel it. Dealing with your wireless or cable
company, you feel it. At the car dealership, you feel it. When you deal with that one
would-be friend, you feel it. Thinking back on that one ex, you feel it. It's a trap.
Get Gone, Get Got, Get Compact or Get Ready
There are four responses to Out to Get You.
You can Get Gone. Walk away. Breathe a sigh of relief.
You can Get Got. Give the thing everything it wants. Pay up, relax, enjoy the show.
You can Get Compact. Find a rule limiting what 'everything it wants' means in context.
Then Get Got, relax and enjoy the show.
You can Get Ready. Do battle. Get what you want.
When to Get Got
Get Got when the deal is Worth It.
This is a diﬃcult lesson for everyone in at least one direction.
I am among those with a natural hatred of Getting Got. I needed to learn to relax and
enjoy the show when the deal is Worth It. Getting Got imposes a large emotional cost
for people like me. I have worked to put this aside when it's time to Get Got, while
preserving my instincts as a defense. That's hard.
Others make the mistake of not hating Getting Got. They might not even notice. This
is bad. If you Get Got without realizing, you'll Get Got often for large amounts. Bad

habits will form. Deals won't be Worth It. Reasonable is insuﬃcient: Out to Get You is
engineered to fool. Only accept capital letters Worth It.
When you Get Got, do it on purpose.
Never Get Got without saying to yourself "I am Getting Got. It is Worth It."
If you realize you've been unwittingly Got, feel sad. Update. Cost is ﬁnite, so you
should sometimes Get Got unaware. It is still unacceptable.
You can choose to Get Got only if you know what you'll be Got for.
You cannot aﬀord to Get Got if the price is not compact.
You can Get Got by a car salesman, saving time and aggravation. Max loss is the
price.
You can Get Got with an unlimited phone plan. Max loss is the price.
You can Get Got by a restaurant, club or cruise ship vacation. Leaving money on the
table and relaxing could be Worth It, if you know your max loss and ﬁnd it acceptable.
You can Get Got in a relationship. That's the Price of Admission. That's ﬁne if you know
the price and ﬁnd it Worth It.
You can buy a AAA game for $60 today rather than $20 next year. Pay $2,000 a year
for Magic: The Gathering. Overpay for concert tickets. Wear a symbolic hat. Go vegan.
Believe the Knicks will be good next year. If you want. Your call.
There may be no reasonable max loss. Some things want too much.
A clean example is free to play mobile games. If allowed, they charge tens of
thousands of dollars. Players called whales are so addicted they pay. The games
destroy them.
The motivating example was Facebook. Facebook wants your entire life. Users not
consciously limiting engagement lose hours a day. Every spare moment is spent
scrolling, checking for updates, likes and comments. This reliably makes users
miserable. Other social networks share this problem.
An important example is politics. Political causes want every spare minute and dollar.
They want to choose your friends, words and thoughts. If given power, they seize the
resources of state and nation for their purposes. Then they take those purposes
further. One cannot simply give any political movement what it wants. That way lies
ruin and madness.
Yes, that means your cause, too.
This generalizes into most suﬃciently intense signaling and status competition. One
must always signal harder or seek higher status. This takes over everything you are
and eats your entire life. Part of sending suﬃciently intense signals is showing that
you have allowed this! Maya Millennial has fallen victim. Those keeping up with the
Joneses fall victim. Many a child looking ﬁtting in or applying to college falls victim.
Obsession with safety does this.

Television eats people's lives. So do video games. So do drugs and alcohol. One must
be careful and know your tenancies and limits.
Ethical arguments do this, ensnaring vulnerable people.
This property is a way to distinguish cults from religions. Cults want it all. Religion
wants its cut.
You can only pay oﬀ those who charge a bounded price and stay bought.
Before you pay the ransom, be sure it will free the hostages.
Would going along result in cooperation? Or put blood in the water?
When To Get Compact
Get Compact when you ﬁnd a rule you can follow that makes it Worth It to Get Got.
The rule must create an acceptable max loss. A well-chosen rule transforms Out to
Get You for a lot into Out to Get You for a price you ﬁnd Worth It. You then Get Got.
This works best using a natural point beyond which lies clear diminishing returns. If no
such point exists, be suspicious.
A simple way is a budget. Spend at most $25,000 on this car, or $5,000 on this
vacation package. This creates an obvious max dollar loss.
Many budgets should be $0. Example: free to play games. Either it's worth playing for
free or it isn't. It isn't.
The downside of budgets is often spending exactly your maximum, especially if others
ﬁgure out what it is. Do your best to avoid this. Known bug.
An alternative is restriction on type. Go to a restaurant and avoid alcohol, desert and
appetizers. Pay in-game only for full game unlocks and storage space.
Budgets can be set for each purchase. Hybrid approaches are good.
Many cap their charitable giving at 10%. Even those giving more reserve some
amount for themselves. Same principle.
For other activities, max loss is about time. Again, you can use a (time) budget or limit
your actions in a way that restricts (time) spent, or combine both.
Time limits are crude but eﬀective. Limiting yourself to an hour of television or social
media per day maxes loss at an hour. This risks making you value the activity more.
Often time budgets get exactly spent same as dollar budgets. Try to let unspent time
roll over into future periods, to avoid fear or 'losing' unspent time.
When time is the limiting factor, it is better where possible to engineer your
environment and options to make the activity compact. You'll get more out of the time
you do spend and avoid feeling like you're arbitrarily cutting yourself oﬀ.
Decide what's worth watching. Watch that.

For Facebook, classify a handful of people See First. See their posts. No others. Look at
social media only on computers. Don't comment. Or post.
A buﬀet creates overeating. Filling up one plate (or one early to explore, then one to
exploit) ends better.
Unlimited often requires limitation.
Outside demands follow the pattern. To make explanation and justiﬁcation easier,
choose good enough rules that sound natural, simple and reasonable.
Experiments need a chance, but also a known point where you can know to call it
quits. Ask whether you can get a deﬁnitive negative result in reasonable time. Will I
worry I did it wrong? Will others claim or assume I did it wrong or didn't give it a fair
chance?
When to Get Ready
Get Ready when you have no choice.
Getting Ready means battle. An enemy trying to Get You. You are determined not to
Get Got. You have done the research. Your eyes are open. You are on alert. You are
ready.
You have no choice. The price of surrender is too high. Simple heuristics won't work.
You are already in too deep, or they have something you need and all alternatives are
worse.
Sometimes you must accept a bad time and try not to let events get to you. Other
times going into battle can be fun. I like games. Games are fun! So are puzzles.
Buying a car, planning a vacation, trading for your Magic deck or managing one's
social media interactions can be a game or puzzle. Get the one trying to get you. Get
a lot for a little.
There are big downsides.
The game can be fun. The original activity can be fun. Both at once is rarely fun. Both
means multi-tasking and context-switching, plus a radical shift in emotion and tone.
Relaxing into cooperative experience is not compatible with battles of wits and tricks.
The result of this is that you often end up unable to maintain both states at once.
Sometimes you end up relaxing, and Get Got. Other times, you focus on not Getting
Got and don't enjoy what you get. Either way, you lose.
The best way out of this is to try and front-load or batch as much of the battle as
possible. Sometimes this happens naturally. If you ﬁrst choose, shop and haggle, then
later enjoy the bounty, that's the ideal way to do battle. Do your best to transform
into that sequence, or to make enough choices to transform into a Compact situation.
If this is not possible, consciously switch between modes when needed. Think, "time
to pause to not get got," deal with the issue, switch back. This minimizes bleeding
between states. If getting attempts are too continuous, this becomes possible and you
need another mode.

You pay for not Getting Got with time and attention. You master arcane details. Time
disappears. You spend parties talking tricks instead of living life. If shower thoughts
shift to such places, you are paying a high price.
The biggest downside is you can lose.
When To Get Gone
Often.
You need good reason to stick around when things are Out to Get You. It is often wise
to Get Gone, if you can.
If your instincts say Get Gone, Get Gone. At worst it is only a small mistake.
If your instincts do not say Get Gone, but you can't ﬁnd a viable approach to
another option, Get Gone anyway.
The getting can be insidious. Constant vigilance is required. Many think they can
handle it, check all the right boxes and not get drawn in. Some are right. Often they
are wrong.
If Getting Got means you lose an order of magnitude bigger than you can
win, Get Gone.
If Getting People is how something survives, Get Gone.
Free trial! Automatically renews. Probably won't want? Don't wait. Get Gone.
You think you are getting good odds. You are probably wrong.
You think you know all the tricks they will try. You are probably wrong.
You think there is something is forcing your hand. Make sure this is something you
need rather than a want. The word need is thrown around a lot these days.
Getting Gone is worth making sacriﬁces. Big sacriﬁces.
If you cannot Get Gone, do not engage more than necessary. Go into Easy
Mode. Get what you must. Then Get Gone.

Play in Easy Mode
Epistemic Status: Love the player, love the game
Also consider: Playing on Hard Mode
Raymond Arnold asked me, why not play in easy mode?
Easy Mode is easier. The reason to Play in Easy Mode is because it is the best known way
to achieve your explicit measurable goal and get to the victory screen.
Strategies that work in Easy Mode won't work in Hard Mode.
The key idea of Easy Mode is to keep your eyes on the prize. You know exactly what you
want. You will munchkin your way to getting it. As long as you get a high enough number,
or a check in the right box, you have what you want. That number isn't just a proxy for
victory. It is victory. If you break the spirit of the exercise, nothing is lost. Your values are
safe. You are not here to develop skills, because the game ends here.
I
Consider playing guitar in Rock Band. You must choose whether to play in Easy Mode. If
you do, you won't fail. You won't need to play the same songs over and over again. You
can use tricks that rely on there only being so many notes, or going at a relaxed pace.
You get to enjoy playing what you want, enjoying all the modes, advancing your band,
right away. You get treated better. You play on medium, your ﬁngers don't hurt, and you
smile as you sing along.
II

You have a test in a week. You cram for it. You've asked questions based on your desire to
know what will be on the test, to resolve your confusion. You ﬁgure out what questions
will be asked, what will help you in the exam. You focus on memorizing key facts, phrases
and techniques, knowing you can guess the teacher's password. When the test comes,
you give back the answers. When you get the test back, you know you have passed and
never have to think about that class again. A year later, you have forgotten everything,
but you have a degree to build on.
III
You prepare for a tournament. You seek out representative opponents to help you
prepare. You look for mistakes you can exploit, and ask what won or lost you each
practice match. You ask how you can turn those events in your favor. You don't worry
about surprising things unless you expect them to be common. You focus on what wins
matches, and don't worry too much about little things that are unlikely to make a big
enough diﬀerence this week. During the matches, you do everything you can to win, then
train against next week.
IV
You start a website writing articles devoted to the things you care about. To monetize it,
you sell advertising through Google. It does not pay much at ﬁrst. You keep at it, posting
links where you can and tracking what vectors draw in readers. Some are your friends,
others seem less special. You look at what gets you clicks and likes, and craft your posts
and topics that way, sculpting articles to maximize page views. Over time you learn the
tricks of the trade and periodically go viral. A community knows who you are. You quit
your day job to run the site full time, and teach others what you have learned.
V
(Spoilers for some old movie)
You are stuck in a small snowed-in town, caught in a time loop of unknown origin. At ﬁrst
you have fun doing absurd things, but then you buckle down. With unlimited time, you
decide to seduce the person you have a crush on. You learn to play them like a piano, to
act like a character out of great literature. You listen to, A/B test and remember every
reaction, until you learn what will make them fond of you, locating opportunities to get
and succeed on a date. At the end of the day, after suﬃcient iterations*, you know you
will be proud of your accomplishments, because you will get to bang the hell out of your
crush. If the loop continues*, you can do it again.
* - Results not guaranteed. You are unlikely to be in a movie. Local maxima may or may
not be suﬃcient.
Interlude!

 
VI
You hire a moving company to help you move. With time and practice, this group of
employees has gotten good and reliable. Any time, if someone needs to relocate, they'll
all be there, no questions asked. You call yourself, every so often. All your stuﬀ arrives
safely at its destination with a minimum of fuss, and you tip generously. You get some
well-needed relaxation and peace of mind.
VII
(Minor spoiler for Lost, at least Season 1 recommended)
You have an idea for a television show about a group of strangers who arrive in a
mysterious place that plays by very diﬀerent rules than our reality. You ﬁgure out some of
the ways this place works, know some of the events that will happen, and lay out
mysteries for the characters and viewers to uncover slowly over time. You use ﬂashbacks
that parallel events to examine and deepen the characters. Your production values are
top notch and you produce great television. Your show is a smash hit, plus you're not sure
exactly where you are going with all this, so you let things drag a bit, padding with extra
episodes. In the end it doesn't quite ﬁt together, but the journey was still pretty great.
VIII
To fulﬁll the terms of your late uncle's last will and testament, you are forced to pursue
what he knew to be your passion, and to strike out and open a ﬁne Italian restaurant.
Your dishes are sublime, but you soon learn that is but a small part of a successful
enterprise. You must hire quality staﬀ, arrange logistics across many suppliers, draw in
customers and much more. Each step of the way, while ruthlessly keeping costs in check,
you answer the question of what customers would need to see in your place to come in,

and expand your menu to oﬀer all the things a diverse group might want. You get to know
your customers by type. A casual observer wouldn't notice how your choices of seating
and lighting make you more money, or the new cheaper sources for your ingredients; all
they know is that the signs tell them the establishment here will let them have a nice
evening. Steadily you iterate and attract more people, and get more of them to order the
wine. Business is good. You hope you made your uncle proud and talk to an agent about
franchising.
IX
You have something to prove.
Hire a cleaning service every so often. It's totally worth it.
Lots of applause lights.
Tell the job interviewer the strengths and weaknesses they want to hear. If they don't hire
you, learn and improve your game, and keep looking.
Find people to come to your meetup by oﬀering them a free hat. Or at least, free pizza.
Pirate music, television, movies, software, even when the owners aren't being kind of a
dick and would sell it to you.
When you are in power, respect the minority only when you don't have the votes, change
the rules to pass the laws you want. Weaken free speech rules and silence those you
disagree with, lest they win and do the same to you.
Write whatever you want on the forms. They are useless bureaucratic nonsense. No one
is ever going to read them. Now you can forget this and move on to more important
things.
Learn your whole speech phonetically.
At your meetup, do not allow challenges to in-group principles, so your group will be
viewed better and feel more welcoming to and attract more members of the in-group, by
demonstrating loyal membership in the in-group.
Tell other people what to do.
For demo day, you show something cool your system might someday do, when you get
around to building one. For that you need funding.
X
Dismayed by terrible things, you devote your life to the promise of artiﬁcial intelligence.
You discover that contrary to your initial beliefs, not only is creating AI not easy, the
problem is super hard! None of your programs work! No one understands the potential.
You set out to teach the AI to play games and optimize recommendations, hoping this will
let them see the potential beneﬁts, with limited  success. You schedule exhibition
matches that are silly, but get you exposure. You keep coding. Machine learning
accomplishes more things and starts to get more funding. People start to come around to
AI being dangerous, but mostly for the wrong reasons, so you know their arguments are
bad. You take some precautions, but you don't worry about the world being doomed. You
are conﬁdent that if they arrive, we can correct for any safety problems later.
 

XI
You are at a meeting to arrange educational services for your son. You know that the only
thing that matters is what is written on the education plan. Whatever is in that document
is what will count. You let numerous falsehoods and stupid things pass, because you
realize that if you just play nice, they are going to put down on the piece of paper the
thing that you want on the piece of paper. They write the words you need on the piece of
paper. You sign it. You walk away happy.
In conclusion:
 

Play in Hard Mode
Epistemic Status: Love the player, love the game
Also consider: Playing on Easy Mode
Raymond Arnold asked me, why do you insist on playing in hard mode?
Hard mode is harder. The reason to Play in Hard Mode is because it is the only known
way to become stronger, and to defend against Goodhart's Law.
Strategies that work in Easy Mode won't work in Hard Mode.
The key idea of Hard Mode is to keep your eyes on the prize. You know exactly what
you want. You can't munchkin your way to getting it. Once you start aiming to make a
number go up, or get a check in the right box, you have lost sight of the thing you
actually want. Proxy measures lead to failure; your value is fragile. That number
correlates to what you want, but only insofar as you're aiming for the goal and not the
number. If you break the spirit of the exercise, all is lost. Your values have been
hijacked. If you fail to develop skills along the way, you have missed the point,
because the game has no end.
I
Consider playing guitar in Rock Band. You must choose whether to play in Hard Mode.
If you do, you will fail a lot. You will play the same songs over and over again. Tricks
that rely on there only being so many notes, or going at a relaxed pace, collapse.
Eventually, you learn new techniques. You get better. You play on expert, your ﬁngers
get sore and you smile as you sing along.
II
You have a test in a week. You ignore it. You've asked questions based on your
curiosity, to resolve your confusion. You study what is interesting to you, and what you
feel would help you in the future.You focus on learning key principles, knowing you can
derive what details you need later on. When the test comes, you work to ﬁgure out
the answers. When you get the test back, you know how much you have learned. A
year later, you remember everything, and build upon it.
III
You prepare for a tournament. You seek out the toughest opponents to help you
prepare. You stop to criticize each other's technique and point out every little mistake,
no matter how irrelevant to the ultimate outcome of the practice match. You ask why
and how you made that mistake. You do the same when you learn something new in a
surprising way. You focus on the fundamentals, and don't worry too much about
exactly who you are up against this week. During the matches, you remember every
tough decision and every mistake, so you can train again next week.
IV
You start a website writing articles devoted to the things you care about. To monetize
it, you sell advertising through Google. It does not pay much at ﬁrst. You keep at it,

attracting a small but devoted readership. Some were already your friends, others
soon join them. You look at what resonates so you can get feedback, but are careful
not to take actions designed to maximize page views. Over time your writing improves
and you learn much together. A community of sorts arises. You don't quit your day job,
but you teach others what you have learned.
V
(Spoilers for the excellent Groundhog Day)
You are stuck in a small snowed-in town, caught in a time loop of unknown origin. At
ﬁrst you have fun doing absurd things, but then you buckle down. With unlimited time,
you decide to develop the skills and knowledge to give everyone a perfect day. You
learn to play the piano, you read great literature. You listen to and remember the
stories of everyone in town, and grow fond of them, learning what your opportunities
are to engage in small acts of kindness. At the end of the day, after suﬃcient
iterations*, you know you will be proud of your accomplishments, because you've
made yourself and the world better, and you just might impress the hell out of your
crush. If the loop continues*, you can do it again.
* - Results not guaranteed. You are unlikely to be in a movie. Local maxima may or
may not be suﬃcient.
Interlude!
 
VI
Your help your friends move. With time and practice, your group of friends gets quite
good and reliable. Any time, day or night, if someone needs to relocate, you'll all be
there, no questions asked. You call yourself the Midnight Movers. Most of your stuﬀ
arrives safely at its destination with a minimum of fuss, and you order everyone pizza.
Your group draws closer together, and eventually tries going into business together on
an unrelated matter.
VII
(Medium spoilers for The Good Place, highly recommended, skip this if you haven't
seen it yet)
You have an idea for a television show about a group of strangers who arrive in a
mysterious place that plays by very diﬀerent rules than our reality. You ﬁgure out
exactly how this place works, plot everything meticulously, and lay out mysteries for
the characters and viewers to uncover slowly over time. You use ﬂashbacks that
parallel events to examine and deepen the characters. Your production values are top
notch and you produce great television. Your show is not a smash hit, and you know
exactly where you are going with all this, so you don't waste a minute, keeping your
seasons short. In the end it all ﬁts together, and the journey was still pretty great on
second viewing.
VIII
Despite the terrible odds against you, you decide to strike out and open a ﬁne Italian
restaurant. Your dishes are sublime, but you soon learn that is but a small part of a

successful enterprise. You must hire quality staﬀ, arrange logistics across many
suppliers, draw in customers and much more. Each step of the way, while ruthlessly
keeping costs in check, you answer the question of what you would want your place to
be like, and evolve your menu to oﬀer a small selection of the best things you can
aﬀordably make. You get to know your customers by name. A casual observer would
think you almost dislike money, as you can barely tell from the outside that there is a
dining establishment there at all. Slowly word spreads among the cognoscenti, who
show up and order the wine. Business is good enough. You get to keep working on
perfecting your art.
IX
You have something to prove. To yourself.
Refuse to hire a cleaning service, ever, even though it's totally worth it.
Minimal applause lights.
Tell the job interviewer your true strengths and weaknesses. If they don't hire you, you
didn't want the job. Keep looking.
Find people to come to your meetup by promising them interesting intellectual
discussions and a community devoted to truth.
Refuse to pirate music, television, movies, software, even when the owners are being
kind of a dick and won't sell it to you.
When you are in power, respect and minority even when you have the votes, don't
change the rules to pass the laws you want. Strengthen free speech rules and don't
silence those you disagree with, lest they do the same to you.
Write carefully as you ﬁll out the forms. They might look like bureaucratic nonsense,
and no one is likely to ever read them, but you should get this straight and cultivate
good habits.
Learn to speak the language.
At your meetup, welcome challenges to in-group principles, so your group will be
viewed better and feel more welcoming to and attract more members who seek the
truth more than they demonstrate membership in the in-group.
Show other people what to do by example.
For demo day, you show what your system can do, and hope that you can keep
building it. For that you need funding.
X
Dismayed by terrible things, you devote your life to the promise of artiﬁcial general
intelligence. You discover that contrary to your initial beliefs, not only is creating AGI
not easy, most versions of it kill everyone and destroy all utility in the universe.
Explaining this is super hard. None of your explanations work. No one understands the
danger. You set out to teach the world rationality, hoping this will cause them to see
the potential dangers, with limited success. You write a book that's silly but gets you
exposure. You keep writing. Machine learning accomplishes more things and starts to

get more funding. People start to come around to AI being dangerous, but mostly for
the wrong reasons, so you don't expect anyone to take the right precautions, and fear
the world is doomed. You think that when they arrive, it will be far too late to correct
for safety problems later.
XI
You are at a meeting to arrange educational services for your son. You know that the
only thing that matters is what is written on the education plan. Whatever is in that
document is what will count. Still, you cannot let the numerous falsehoods and stupid
things pass, even though you realize that if you just play nice, they are going to put
down on the piece of paper the thing that you want on the piece of paper. If you keep
arguing, you risk getting nothing. Luckily, you think better of it in time. You go into
easy mode. They write the words you need on the piece of paper. You sign it. You walk
away happy.
In conclusion...

Slack
Epistemic Status: Reference post. Strong beliefs strongly held after much thought, but
hard to explain well. Intentionally abstract.
Disambiguation: This does not refer to any physical good, app or piece of software.
Further Research (book, recommended but not at all required, take seriously but not
literally): The Book of the Subgenius
Related (from sam[ ]zdat, recommended but not required, take seriously and also
literally, entire very long series also recommended): The Uruk Machine
Further Reading (book): Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means So Much
Previously here (not required): Play in Hard Mode, Play in Easy Mode, Out to Get You
Leads to (I've been scooped! Somewhat...): Sabbath Hard and Go Home
An illustrative little game: Carpe Diem: The Problem of Scarcity and Abundance
Slack is hard to precisely deﬁne, but I think this comes close:
Deﬁnition: Slack. The absence of binding
constraints on behavior.
Poor is the person without Slack. Lack of Slack compounds and traps.
Slack means margin for error. You can relax.
Slack allows pursuing opportunities. You can explore. You can trade.
Slack prevents desperation. You can avoid bad trades and wait for better spots. You
can be eﬃcient.
Slack permits planning for the long term. You can invest.
Slack enables doing things for your own amusement. You can play games. You can
have fun.
Slack enables doing the right thing. Stand by your friends. Reward the worthy. Punish
the wicked. You can have a code.
Slack presents things as they are without concern for how things look or what others
think. You can be honest.
You can do some of these things, and choose not to do others. Because you don't
have to.
Only with slack can one be a righteous dude.
Slack is life.

Related Slackness
Slack in project management is the time a task can be delayed without causing a
delay to either subsequent tasks or project completion time. The amount of time
before a constraint binds.
Slack the app was likely named in reference to a promise of Slack in the project sense.
Slacks as trousers are pants that are actual pants, but do not bind or constrain.
Slackness refers to vulgarity in West Indian culture, behavior and music. It also refers
to a subgenre of dancehall music with straightforward sexual lyrics. Again, slackness
refers to the absence of a binding constraint. In this case, common decency or
politeness.
A slacker is one who has a lazy work ethic or otherwise does not exert maximum
eﬀort. They slack oﬀ. They refuse to be bound by what others view as hard
constraints.
Out to Get You and the Attack on Slack
Many things in this world are Out to Get You. Often they are Out to Get You for a lot,
usually but not always your time, attention and money.
If you Get Got for compact amounts too often, it will add up and the constraints will
bind.
If you Get Got even once for a non-compact amount, the cost expands until the you
have no Slack left. The constraints bind you.
You might spend every spare minute and/or dollar on politics, advocacy or charity. You
might think of every dollar as a fraction of a third-world life saved. Racing to ﬁnd a
cure for your daughter's cancer, you already work around the clock. You could have an
all-consuming job or be a soldier marching oﬀ to war. It could be a quest for revenge,
for glory, for love. Or you might spend every spare minute mindlessly checking
Facebook or obsessed with your fantasy football league.
You cannot relax. Your life is not your own.
It might even be the right choice! Especially for brief periods. When about to be run
over by a truck or evicted from your house, Slack is a luxury you cannot aﬀord.
Extraordinary times call for extraordinary eﬀort.
Most times are ordinary. Make an ordinary eﬀort.
You Can Aﬀord It
No, you can't. This is the most famous attack on Slack. Few words make me angrier.
The person who says "You Can Aﬀord It" is saying to ignore constraints that do not
bind you. If you do, all constraints soon bind you.

Those who do not value Slack soon lose it. Slack matters. Fight to keep yours!
Ask not whether you can aﬀord it. Ask if it is Worth It.
Unless you can't aﬀord it. Aﬀordability is invaluable negative selection. Never positive
selection.
The You Can Aﬀord It tax on Slack quickly approaches 100% if unchecked.
If those with extra resources are asked to share the whole surplus, all are poor or hide
their wealth. Wealth is a burden and makes you a target. Those visibly ﬂush rush to
spend their bounty.
Where those with free time are given extra work, all are busy or look busy. Those with
copious free time seek out relatively painless time sinks they can point to.
When looking happy means you deal with everything unpleasant, no one looks happy
for long.
The Slackless Like of Maya Millennial
Things are bad enough when those with Slack are expected to sacriﬁce for others.
Things are much worse when the presence of Slack is viewed as a defection.
An example of this eﬀect is Maya Millennial (of The Premium Mediocre Life of Maya
Millennial). She has no Slack.
Constraints bind her every action. Her job in life is putting up a front of the person she
wants to show people that she wants to be. If her constraints noticeably failed to bind
the illusion would fail.
Every action is being watched. If no one is around to watch her, the job falls to her.
She must post all to Facebook, to Snapchat, to Instagram. Each action and choice
signals who she is and her loyalty to the system. Not doing that this time could mean
missing her one chance to make it big.
Maya never has free time. There is signaling to do! At a minimum, she must spend
such time on alert and on her phone lest she miss something.
Maya never has spare cash. All must be spent to advance and ﬁt her proﬁle.
Maya lacks free speech, free association, free taste and free thought. All must serve.
Maya is in a world where she must signal she has no Slack. Slack means insuﬃcient
dedication and loyalty. Slack cannot be trusted. Slack now means slack later, which
means failure. Future failure means no opportunity.
This is more common than one might think.
"Give Me Slack or Kill Me" - J.R. "Bob" Dobbs
The aim of this post was to introduce Slack and give an intuitive picture of its
importance.

The short-term practical takeaways are:
Make sure that under normal conditions you have Slack. Value it. Guard it. Spend it
only when Worth It. If you lose it, ﬁght to get it back. This provides motivation for
ﬁghting things Out To Get You, lest you let them eat your Slack.
Make sure to run a diagnostic test every so often to make sure you're not running
dangerously low, and to engineer your situation to force yourself to have Slack. I
recommend Sabbath Hard and Go Home with my take to follow soon.
Also respect the Slack of others. Help them value and guard it. Do not spend it lightly.
A Final Note
I kept this short rather than add detailed justiﬁcations. Hopefully the logic is intuitive
and builds on what came before. I hope to expand on the details and models later. For
a very good book-length explanation of why lacking Slack is awful, see Scarcity: Why
Having Too Little Means So Much.

Sabbath hard and go home
Growing up Jewish, I thought that the traditional rules around the Sabbath were silly.
Then I forgot to bring a spare battery on a camping trip. Now I think that something
like the traditional Jewish Sabbath is an important cultural adaptation to preserve
leisure, that would otherwise be destroyed in an urbanized, technological civilization.
Sabbath as easy mode
As a child, I ﬁrst learned that the Sabbath was a "day of rest," a day on which you
don't do "work." I was brought up by liberal Jews in a society in which "work" tends to
mean either business or wage labor. Things you do for money. Things you do because
someone else demands them. This is for the most part how we observed the Sabbath.
But I was also taught about the older traditions in which many categories of mundane
activity are forbidden: lighting a ﬁre, cutting or mending cloth, writing or erasing
letters. This seemed to me like an arbitrary superstition based on an excessive
literality. Surely I could tell for myself whether I was writing as part of a leisure activity
or a desk job. Surely I could tell for myself whether I was planting seeds for my private
garden, or on a commercial farm. Why avoid these activities in the privacy of one's
own home, doing things for oneself, and not working at all?
Likewise, Orthodox Jews must walk to and from their synagogue on the Sabbath,
because driving would involve lighting a ﬁre. Automobile engines run on combustion,
after all. Liberal Jews often argued, if there is inclement weather, or if the synagogue
is far, is it not more restful to take an easy drive than to walk?
In short, I thought that the rest of the Sabbath meant, or ought to mean, playing life
on easy mode.
Unplugging as leisure
Recently, I've been feeling too caught up in local social momentum. When it looked
like it would be diﬃcult and take a long time to book a cabin to spend some time
alone, I asked a friend to teach me how to go camping, to improve my range of
options for solitude, both by directly giving me the aﬀordance for camping, and by
more generally expanding the range of living conditions I had experience coping with.
On my ﬁrst solo two-night camping trip, I forgot to bring a backup battery to charge
my laptop or phone. I was car camping, so I could have charged them that way, but I
felt like that was outside the spirit of the exercise, and inconvenient anyway. So
instead, I mostly kept my phone turned oﬀ. Very quickly, I started being able to think
about aspects of my situation that had been too overwhelming, too in motion, to get
leverage on the day before. Because I wasn't dealing with them. I wasn't keeping up
with anything. I was just present, where I was. I wished I'd done this years ago.
And then I realized: if I had keeping a Sabbath, it wouldn't have taken years to take a
step back from social momentum. I'd have gotten a chance within seven days of
noticing that there was a problem. And seven days later, another chance, and so on.

Immediately, came the reﬂexive follow-up thought: of course, not the literal Orthodox
Jewish Sabbath. But then I asked my self: why not, exactly?
I went through some of the more onerous-seeming requirements. You are not
permitted to write. But when I went on a meditation retreat, they also asked us not to
write. And I had no problem with that. It did not seem like an arbitrary superstition to
me; it seemed like part of the discipline of an integrated mental practice.
Maybe the Sabbath too is a discipline meant to cultivate a particular sort of mental
practice.
You are not allowed to light ﬁres on the Sabbath, which means no cooking; you eat
what has been prepared in advance. On that same meditation retreat, we were asked
not to bring or prepare our own food, but to accept what was served to us. That too
felt like a natural part of the practice.
Why had I been so ready to dismiss the Sabbath out of hand? Where did this prejudice
come from? It came from my childhood self, who was assuming alienation of labor.
Work as keeping up
If you do not assume like a modern consumerist that work is what you do for money,
and leisure is what you spend money on, then what is work? It is the activity of
producing or maintaining the artifacts necessary for the ongoing production of
sustenance. It is the activity of keeping up with reality. And in a civilized society with
specialization of labor, where your work is only productive because it is integrated
with the work of many others, work is the practice of keeping up with the predominant
social reality.
What is leisure, then? Leisure is time when you are not responding to a persistent
stream of demands. Not your boss, but not a television commercial or newsfeed
either. You can take a walk, or sit silently with friends, and let your mind wander.
Leisure is crucial for a very particular sort of freedom. Not freedom as the range of
options presented to you, or the absence of overt restrictions on your behavior, but
the amount of autonomy you have in practice, the extent to which the choices you are
making are determined by the combination of your own preferences and foresight,
rather than the result of being led down a path of someone else's design.
The distinction between this sort of work and leisure is not a perfect match to the
Sabbath prohibitions.
You can read a book on the Sabbath (which was not allowed at the meditation retreat),
and engage with your whole mind, so long as you do not take notes. So long as you do
not try to produce some useful artifact, for your future self to pick up and run with.
You can also talk. Jews do not engage in Noble Silence on the Sabbath; it is not a day
of silence. But it cuts out some of the more cognitively costly practices of daily life.
Sabbath as hard mode

Some automation plans make sure to include what they call a human in the loop - on
some level of abstraction, every decision is reviewed by a human. You can think of the
Sabbath as playing life on hard mode in order to make sure that there is a human in
your loop.
You would not want to do this sort of thing all the time. But it might make sense to do
periodically - perhaps once a week - as a stopgap measure to combat attention drift. If
powerful and pervasive cultural forces are out to get you, you ought to check in from
time to time with yourself, and other people with whom you have local, high-quality
relationships, to give yourself a chance to notice whether you have gotten got for too
much.
Daily meditation or reﬂection practice has something to oﬀer on this front. So does the
Quaker practice of silent worship. And so does the Jewish Sabbath.
Sabbath as alarm
One more useful attribute of the Jewish Sabbath is the extent to which its rigid rules
generate friction in emergency situations. If your community center is not within
walking distance, if there is not enough slack in your schedule to prep things a day in
advance, or you are too poor to go a day without work, or too locally isolated to last a
day without broadcast entertainment, then things are not okay.
In our commercialized society, there will be many opportunities to purchase
palliatives, and these palliatives are often worth purchasing. If living close to your
place of employment would be ruinously expensive, you drive or take public transit. If
you don't have time to feed yourself, you can buy some fast food. If you're not up for
talking with a friend in person, or don't have the time, there's Facebook. But this is
palliative care for a chronic problem.
In Jewish law, it is permissible to break the Sabbath in an emergency situation, when
lives are at stake. If something like the Orthodox Sabbath seems impossibly hard, or if
you try to keep it but end up breaking it every week - as my Reform Jewish family did -
then you should consider that perhaps, despite the propaganda of the palliatives, you
are in a permanent state of emergency. This is not okay. You are not doing okay.
So, how are you?

Bring Back the Sabbath
Epistemic Status: Several months of experimentation
Previously: Choices are Bad, Choices Are Really Bad, Complexity Is Bad, Play in Easy
Mode, Play in Hard Mode, Out to Get You, Slack
For More Thoughts After: Sabbath Commentary
Alternate Take (Endorsed): Sabbath Hard and Go Home.
Slack is life. It is under attack. We must ﬁght for it.
Choices Are Bad. Really Bad. We need a break.
Complexity Is Bad. We need a break.
Work is exhausting. We need a break.
Relaxation is hard. Our attempts fail or backﬁre.
The modern world is Out to Get You. We need a break.
We need time for ourselves. Time that is truly our own.
Without setting aside such time, that won't happen. Even when you take time, you'll
be continuously choosing to take time, and... well, whoops.
Modern life made the problem worse, but the problem is ancient. The ancients had an
answer.
We need rules. We need ritual.
We need the Sabbath.
Cabin in the Woods
The parallels of my and Ben Hoﬀman's Sabbath realizations are striking.
A few months ago, like Ben, I needed a break. My job puts me under constant
pressure. My weekends weren't refreshing me. Like Ben, I experimented with
camping. Like Ben, I had no spare battery, and left my phone oﬀ.  I read The Great
Transformation. I had meant to do that for weeks. I loved the world leaving me alone.
Like Ben, I could relax, slow down, think.
I wasn't worried about things I could be doing - I couldn't do them.
Could I get this without the trip? Friends had started hosting Friday night dinners.
What about the whole thing? What if we brought back the Sabbath?
Tradition makes rules easier to justify and explain, to others and yourself. These rules
were time tested. I could take them and make them my own.

I thought about the components. Which made sense? What rules would let me cut the
enemy, and relax?
Return of the Ritual
Rituals need clear beginnings and endings.
Sabbath begins with candles. One lights two candles, and recites a blessing.
For the evening meal, one says additional words and blessings, drinks wine, eats
bread from one of two whole loafs and sits down to a proper meal with friends and
family.
The candles are a signpost and deadline. Your week is complete and your work is
done. There will be guests, so the apartment is ready. The ritual objects, and your
needs for tomorrow, are secured. The meal is prepared. Time to feast and relax!
Slack is thus preserved in ﬁve ways.
This creates a time and place to see friends and family. Most want more social events,
but coordination is hard and events are work. Now there's always Friday night.
They increase the value of improving your home. Every week you notice the little
things that enrich meal, visit and home. They're Worth It, but easy to forget.
Enhancing the little things enhances your life.
They prevent accumulation of personal-and-home-related work debt. A chaotic house
is not restful. Postponed chores weigh on you. The deadline forces handling them in
advance. Payoﬀ is immediate.
By moving work before the deadline you are forced to make time during the week. You
don't eat into Slack. If you can't ﬁnd the time, this alerts you. Emergency!
They create visible failure as you approach hard bounds. When emergency arises, you
sacriﬁce from the ritual. This signals emergency before life falls apart. You still have
reserves. The ritual is Slack.
Sabbath ends with another candle. This prevents doing work until you go through non-
trivial motions. You must do it on purpose.
Four Freedoms
We need restrictions that free us from the world. We need a new four freedoms.
We need freedom from work. Decide what counts as work to you. Don't do that.
Anything done for money is automatically work. During the week, time is money.
Today, do what you value.
We need freedom from interruption. Space to think. Cut oﬀ the outside world.
Especially cut oﬀ anything continuously updating and all periodic rewards. There lie
Skinner boxes. Much of the world is out to get you. Today it can wait. Friendly visitors
are welcome, but ideally arranged in advance.
We need freedom from choice. Full freedom from choice requires a step beyond the
traditional rules. In my version, even among permitted activities, only those explicitly

selected in advance are available - particular books, radio stations and so forth - plus
things you feel intrinsic motivation to do. No lists. No browsing.
We need freedom from stress. Stressful conversations are not allowed. Doing work is
not allowed. Making decisions is not allowed. Outside information is not allowed. If
something was still going to stress you out and it was ﬁxable, ﬁx it before the
Sabbath. Things can't change on their own, and you can't make them change. Why
stress?
Sabbath Easy, Sabbath Easy, Sabbath Hard
 
Tension exists between that which is most restful right now, and that which would be a
stable set of rules. There are two Easy Modes, representing each extreme.
One extreme is Orthodox Sabbath. This uses a strict, ﬁxed set of rules. Pure
deontology. You can't carry objects without special preparations. Many objects
you can't even touch. This interferes a lot with relaxation, and forces realignment of
life to prevent that. That can be good. There are even rules about violating the spirit
of the rules - if you violate the spirit without breaking even those rules, that's almost
encouraged. Restrictions allow maximization.
Another extreme is Reform Sabbath. This asks, what would be most restful today? This
is utilitarian and uses causal decision theory. Sabbath is for rest, so if driving a car or
making a call would be more restful, do that. You could break the rules. This destroys
freedom from choice. Who respects such boundaries? You won't have
urgency before the Sabbath. You can handle things later. Wouldn't that be more
restful? 
The Hard Mode approach asks, what sustainable rule set best preserves long run
Slack? Taking stock and encouraging Slack-preserving outside the Sabbath are explicit
goals. It uses logical decision theory. It creates personalized rules you can follow that
work for you, but understands each divergence you select is expensive.
It asks what would be in the spirit of the rules, and modifying the rules to reﬂect that
spirit. It views breaking current rules during the Sabbath with extreme skepticism, to
reinforce following the rules. It modiﬁes rules on Sunday.
In choice-related ways my current system is more restrictive than the Orthodox
version. Mostly it is less restrictive, but becoming more restrictive over time. I
currently allow Level 4 but everything there is on the chopping block. On Friday night I
restrict to Level 2.
Hierarchy of the Shabbistic
There exists a hierarchy of shabbisticness. At one end are activities aligned with the
goals of relaxing, recharging and unplugging. Sleep certainly qualiﬁes. At the other
are activities perfectly in conﬂict with those goals. Work done for money.
The hierarchy's details are diﬀerent for diﬀerent people. If you see something as work,
it drains you. Move it down towards the unshabbistic. If you see something as
invigorating, and have the spontaneous urge to do it for intrinsic reasons, move it up
towards the shabbistic.

Then draw a hard line. Deciding whether to allow something is an impactful choice
(itself banned) and a slippery slope. The golden rule of Sabbath is not breaking the 
rules. When in doubt, don't do the thing, then reﬁne your rule on Sunday.
I encourage stricter rules for Friday night than Saturday. This enriches without being
stiﬂing.
This is my current hierarchy. Levels 1-2 I consider purely good, Levels 3 good, Level 4 
questionable. Level 5 is bad, Level 6 very bad. Level 7 is banned all week.
1. Pure rest. Sleep. Rest. Walking. Intellectual discussion. Friendly discussion.
Reading physical books and other physical objects. Meditation. Museums. Taking
a bath.
2. Active rest. Sex. Flirting. Running. Swimming. Playing sports. Arguments for low
stakes. Board and card games with no stakes. Puzzles. Building models. Taking a
shower. Eating. Watching sports in person. Light switches.
3. Consumptive rest. Riding elevators. Radio with one station. Listening to music.
Food preparation without lighting a ﬁre. Window shopping. Kindle and other e-
books.
4. Potentially toxic actions. Writing for yourself. Taking notes. Practicing and
training personal skills that are not work or work related. Working out. Computer
games. Pre-selected television. Phone calls and texts for physical coordination
purposes. Riding in cars and trains (without payment).
5. Violations of compactness. Phone calls and texts not for same-day logistical
coordination. All other use of smartphones. Making impactful decisions.
Planning. Flipping stations on television or radio. Browsing the internet. Browsing
a giant music collection. All long lists, especially lists of choices. Checking
anything that continuously updates. Lighting a ﬁre. Stressful topics of
conversation.
6. Work and outside demands. Exchange of money. Doing business. Anything that
earns money or creates commercial value. Negotiations. All continuous updates.
Email.
7. Considered harmful. All timed and daily rewards. Micro-transactions. Social
media.
The Rules Simpliﬁed
Start here. Adjust as needed.
Light candles before sundown Friday to begin.
No outside inputs except in person.
No choices impacting post-Sabbath.
Light and extinguish no ﬁres. Do no work or business. Spend no money.
Only preselected and spontaneously motivated actions are allowed. No browsing. No
lists.
Light another candle after sundown Saturday to end.
State of Emergency

I brought back Sabbath for Slack and relaxation. Ben brought it back as an alarm
system, for when life was out of control. Sabbath shows when you are not okay, and
provides method and incentive to get back to okay.
This Saturday I did full Orthodox Sabbath (minus prayer), and also fasted, as an
experiment. I won't do this every week or even month, but it had important alarm
value.
Ben's post is excellent. Read the whole thing. I'll ﬁnish with two key passages from it.
Key motivation:
You would not want to do this sort of thing all the time. But it might make sense to
do periodically - perhaps once a week - as a stopgap measure to combat
attention drift. If powerful and pervasive cultural forces are out to get you, you
ought to check in from time to time with yourself, and other people with whom
you have local, high-quality relationships, to give yourself a chance to notice
whether you have gotten got for too much.
His conclusion is important and worth quoting in full:
One more useful attribute of the Jewish Sabbath is the extent to which its rigid
rules generate friction in emergency situations. If your community center is not
within walking distance, if there is not enough slack in your schedule to prep
things a day in advance, or you are too poor to go a day without work, or too
locally isolated to last a day without broadcast entertainment, then things are not
okay.
In our commercialized society, there will be many opportunities to purchase
palliatives, and these palliatives are often worth purchasing. If living close to your
place of employment would be ruinously expensive, you drive or take public
transit. If you don't have time to feed yourself, you can buy some fast food. If
you're not up for talking with a friend in person, or don't have the time, there's
Facebook. But this is palliative care for a chronic problem.
In Jewish law, it is permissible to break the Sabbath in an emergency situation,
when lives are at stake. If something like the Orthodox Sabbath seems impossibly
hard, or if you try to keep it but end up breaking it every week - as my Reform
Jewish family did - then you should consider that perhaps, despite the propaganda
of the palliatives, you are in a permanent state of emergency. This is not okay. You
are not doing okay.
So, how are you?
 
 
 
 
 

 

Sabbath Commentary
Epistemic Status: Several months of experimentation, then talking from the hip
Commentary On: Bring Back the Sabbath
Required: Slack
I have a lot of thoughts on the topic that don't belong in the main presentation. I'm going to
put them here in disorganized form for the curious. These claims are believed, but I may not
have good explicit evidence to defend them with. I'm ﬁne with that.
 
I. Slack Against Slack
One might challenge Sabbath with, "Isn't it weird protecting Slack by taking Slack away?
Aren't you avoiding hard bounds on behavior by imposing hard bounds on behavior?" 
Yes, I am doing that. Yes it is weird. Also suspicious.
 
You're taking some types of Slack away by forbidding and requiring activities, to guard and
create the Slack that matters.
This can backﬁre. When I was a kid the Sabbath was rules preventing fun. Saturday was just
Sunday except nothing worked and you sat in a room for three hours while people mumbled
in Hebrew. That's not a solution, that's making the problem worse. Sunday was free from
outside pressures and insanely great! Why not do that?
So no, not everyone needs a Sabbath for Slack or relaxation. It is one solution among many
to the problems of outside pressures, to too many choices, to having less than no time and
not enough money. Not everyone even has those problems. If you have so much time and so
little to do, rather than striking that and reversing it, a regular Sabbath is not right for you.
This is your periodic reminder to reverse all advice you hear.
You still need to take stock sometimes. If there's nothing worth doing, forcing the issue by
taking away your social media and match three games might help solve your rut. Is that
worth one day in seven? Probably not, but one in forty-nine?
II. Sabbath Dinner
I kept and went into a lot of detail on the Sabbath dinner. The dinner speaks to me and my
needs a lot. It might not speak to yours, but I'm a big fan, and want to say more about that.
Here are some non-obvious beneﬁts, in addition to the ones I already mentioned - a place
and time that enables social gatherings and visits and/or family/relationship time, a strong
demarcation and strongly positive experience for the transition to your day of rest, and
providing urgency and incentive to take care of business around the house and make it a
place worth living in.
Sabbath dinner gives incentive and opportunity to learn to cook. Cooking skill is an
investment that pays oﬀ. The few things I know how to cook well provide great beneﬁt to me,
even though my wife Laura is a much better cook. If you can't cook, you'll be forced to do
commerce constantly to eat reasonably. Having to go into that mode in order to get your
daily sustenance is actually pretty bad. It's great to know that if need be, you can take care
of things yourself, if you're short on cash or in an unfamiliar place without good options.
There's also something very satisfying about both cooking and knowing how to cook. With

time, you learn to make things exactly the way you like, and things are pretty great. They're
even better than that for those around you. Highly recommended. Basic life skills and self-
suﬃciency are a thing, they are key to Slack. Muddling through without them is a trap.
This then contrasts with the lack of cooking during Sabbath. I suspect that it should go a step
further and you should perhaps fast on the Sabbath, with the feast at the start setting you up
well for either. Fasting takes away the distraction of thinking about food, and fasting is a key
Slack skill - if you need to eat all the time, that can lead to some bad trade-oﬀs. If I don't
have good options I know I can always fast, because I have the practice. Even if cooking is
allowed, consumption shouldn't be a focus during the Sabbath day, it's out of place.
There's also making sure you treat yourself to one true feast each week, one indulgence for
yourself. You need it, you deserve it, and you need to conﬁrm that you have the Slack for it.
You want something to have gratitude for - prayer and blessings are phrased like you're
trying to placate or negotiate or petition a higher power, but really it's a trick to get you to
write gratitude letters. Thus, you want the meal to be visibly abundant and bountiful. This is
why it's important to me to have two full loaves of bread for the main blessing. You only truly
needed one, but you make sure to have two anyway.
The wine is similar. I don't drink, but I totally understand the idea of "I need a drink" and the
idea of a time when one can drink, and think those are important even though I don't get
enjoyment out of alcohol and thus save my calories for elsewhere outside of ritual quantities.
It's weird that I can be in the state of "I need a drink" and still not want one; I appreciate the
beneﬁts other people get and want those beneﬁts, but I know I wouldn't get them. Plus,
alcohol is kind of a terrible drug and cause of all life's problems, so sitting non-symbolic
quantities of this one out seems wise.
This is something I have to sacriﬁce to get. Work provides me with free and quite good lunch
even if it can't hold a candle to my wife's cooking, but I don't have the caloric budget to eat
three meals in a day, so I have to both give up on a free lunch and I have to get through the
day hungry. When I ﬁnally get home, I'm that much more appreciative, and I value my ritual,
feast and rest that much more.
I think others can and should substitute other things (although I would still light the candles,
and say some ritual words of your choosing), but that the idea of starting the Sabbath with a
special indulgence that speaks to you is very important. Save something special to you for
that slot in the week. Make sure it stands out.
III. Travel
An argument can be made that, while freedom to go anywhere would be a violation of
freedom from choice and also feel a lot like work, being able to go places in accordance with
plans seems valuable and reasonable, especially if you can take a train or bus with a
monthly pass, or otherwise avoid spending money and avoid driving. I think it's a reasonable
stance to allow this for (and only for) plans made together with other people, but would still
be cautious about that.
Being physically next to the people you care about, and the people you want to spend time
with, is an important thing we have lost. Proximity, including being able to walk to each other
and knock on the door, is important. Knowing your neighbors, or at least some of them, is
important. I think it's great that a bunch of people in The Bay are moving to the same street,
even if I think the particular street isn't in the best location. I hope they knock on each
other's doors all the time unannounced, and I hope lots of other people drop by all the time
and let spontaneous things happen. That would be great.
I used to live in the same building as my good friend Alyssa, and that was pretty great. I
would love to live that close to my friends again, and hope to coordinate such a thing here in
New York at some point. Perhaps in a year or so. Giving people a strong extra incentive to do

this, given they should be doing it anyway, seems very good. Not having this is an
emergency situation and needs to be treated like one.
Right now, we're kind of cheating, because we won't travel but our friends mostly will, so
they come to us. Those others who actually do keep the Sabbath, are exactly those
we can't see on Saturday. So that's weird, and I don't love it, but I think it's a price worth
paying.
IV. Screens
There is something obviously bad about screens, even when we can't quite put our ﬁnger on
exactly what it is. We can say things like 'takes our focus away from where we are and what
is happening' but that doesn't seem like it captures the true objection. Their demand for
attention, the constant impulse to look at them even when you don't want to, is deﬁnitely
also a big factor. We've all heard the arguments. Certainly there should be a prejudice that
things done with screens are more unshabbistic than things done without them, even when
the thing being done is the same.
Despite that, screens have great utility and power, so we need to think hard about exactly
what we're doing and what eﬀect it has. If you're reading a Kindle, isn't that basically
reading a book? It sort of is, but it also sort of isn't. It feels like you're invoking something
you shouldn't be, it strains the eyes, it doesn't give you physical control of what you're doing
in the same way, it can hold lots of books and thus implies choice you want to have freedom
from. Your environment no longer is what it appears to be. Certainly the Kindle book is much
less bad than most uses of screens, but it still feels like it should be strongly discouraged.
Does this then mean a bunch of physical books that you don't otherwise need? It might. Is
that good or bad? I'm not sure, but I think it is good. By going digital perhaps we are trading
for convenience at the expense of building a library (again, creating a home) and a
connection to what we are reading. Having books around means books get read and thought
about in a way a Kindle does not. The main advantage of a Kindle is that it allows the
easy taking and sharing of notes but that is the least Shabbistic thing one can do with a
book!
Computers and smart phones are highly dangerous, oﬀering tons of choices and distractions
and opportunities for the outside world to reach you. Phones are the worst, threatening each
free moment. We've been trained to reach for our phones every spare moment, constantly
comparing what we're doing to what little distraction we could be looking at. They also let
anyone reach you, and provide a world of resources and connection if you wanted it. I think
it's important to physically leave your phone behind on the Sabbath if there's no pending
emergency.
I have used computer for two purposes on the Sabbath, to write and to play video games.
Writing is a special case. Playing video games can be relaxing, but it can also be a palliative
and Skinner box you no longer enjoy that prevents you from taking stock. I realized that the
game I'd been playing wasn't something I was still enjoying that much; it had turned into
work and stress, still with satisfaction and strategy but mostly I wanted to see how it ends
and achieve victory - the joy of the journey was mostly dead. That doesn't mean I don't still
want to ﬁnish, but it does mean it's not Shabbistic.
V. Notiﬁcations
Sabbath proper begins with lighting candles. The ritual truly begins for me earlier than that,
when I ﬁnish work: I turn email notiﬁcations oﬀ on my phone.
Notiﬁcations are tricky when you don't want to be bothered, but still know you have the urge
to check for new things. If you have notiﬁcations on, you'll be interrupted every time you get
notiﬁed, and that's terrible. If you turn them oﬀ, the risk is that you'll still worry there's
something waiting for you, and you'll check anyway, even if there isn't anything to see, and
that's even worse. So you only want to turn notiﬁcations oﬀ if you'll actually be able to

ignore the situation. The act of turning notiﬁcations oﬀ is my way of telling myself that it is
time to start winding things down. I still have some preparations to do and several miles to
travel, but as of now the world can wait.
Turning notiﬁcations back on, and checking my email, always feels like a mistake. I want to
postpone it, knowing that once I look I'll be drawn back in, and I keep meaning to move that
to Sunday morning but keep not doing it. That is a sign of how bad things have gotten. How
am I, indeed?
VI. Writing
Writing is important to me. Writing is how I ﬁgure things out for myself, and it's value that I
hope I am creating for others, and it's part of the grand project that isn't my career and isn't
my family, and that I'm hoping will actually matter. I have a lot of ideas running around in my
head all the time, and working them out has strong intrinsic motivation. It is refreshing to me
to work on that, and would greatly bother me not to. So for now, I do write on the Sabbath,
even though it does seem suspiciously like work.
One result of this is that I am very careful to make sure that I'm not being compensated in
any way for writing. If I was making money oﬀ this, it would so obviously be work I would
have no excuse. It also might quickly destroy my intrinsic motivation. I am very worried
about such things, and distortions of incentives to pay attention to numbers or incentive
gradients rather than the things I have intrinsic motivation to work on. I'm meaning to write
a post talking about the grave dangers of Karma systems to places like Less Wrong 2.0,
because attaching numbers to things with rapid feedback is a deal with the devil and I'm
quite worried the devil will end up winning. So an extra reason to keep on my toes about
such things seems quite good, at least for now.
It comes down to, this is my day, and I need to do with it what I am driven to do - the very
things that are under attack, and that I need my Slack in order to preserve. Otherwise, what
was the point? But at some point this may reverse, and it will feel like pressure and work,
and I hope I have the wisdom to change my rules to reﬂect this.
Note that I post my writing often on Saturday morning. That's intentional. By timing my posts
for Sabbath, I give everyone a full day to read and react before I have the chance to look at
comments or votes or hits or anything else. That rabbit hole is bad, and I'm glad I have a
way to avoid it.
VII. Football
Rationalists tend not to be sports fans. I think that's a shame, for many reasons (that I hope
to explain some time, but not now), but the key here is that I am the exception. Watching a
good football game (Go Badgers!) is one of my great joys. However, it also involves
television, and a giant array of possible games and lots of outside information running across
the screen, so it's dangerous. How to handle this?
My answer for now is that football is being somewhere, and being in the moment. That
somewhere is elsewhere and that moment isn't here, which are notches against. There is a
screen involved, and that's not great either. But sharing an experience with my fellow man of
a story unfolding before us, of going through a ritual unique to the weekend where we
celebrate the fruits of our hard work? Some friendly competition? That totally works for me. If
I could walk to the stadium and hand them my (previously purchased) ticket, I wouldn't bat
an eye at that, it would be obviously great. If it was baseball, it would be even more
obviously great, except that it wouldn't be football, and also the Mets are awful.
So to the extent that I am moving forward in time and being in the moment, and watching a
real-time story unfold as we journey through the season together, even if it is on tape delay,
and to the extent that the games to watch have been chosen in advance (thus avoiding
choice), I think this is ﬁne. I think football (and College Gameday, which I enjoy the ritual of

for reasons) are permissible and good in a way that most television would not be, and in a
way that scripted dramas or comedies deﬁnitely would not be. It's not a palliative, not in the
same way, or at least it's one I'm willing to allow.
A ﬁnal good reason is that sports are cyclical. For ﬁve months we have football. For the
remaining seven we don't. That ensures we take a break.
Am I rationalizing and making excuses? Not impossible. It wouldn't shock me if I realized this
had to go and I moved my watching to Sunday.
Until then!
VIII. Alarm
There is a lot to be said for the strict version, where the rules are as they always have been.
You don't have to debate or choose or reﬁne the rules, you only follow them. They do a very
good job of forcing your hand, and of alerting you to how reliant you are on things you may
not wish to be reliant on, allowing you to ﬁx all that. Similarly, going camping without
electronics is an eye opener, forcing your hand. I don't think it's a coincidence that both me
and Ben Hoﬀman started our experiments after a camping trip.
For now, I'm going with the personalized hybrid version. I think that the act of thinking hard
about what things I want to do without, what things I can do without, and what things I can't
do without, along with which things would enhance or degrade my experience, is exactly
what will lead me to better understand how to handle these issues.
My worry is that this isn't robust over time. Such a procedure requires buy-in, requires
motivation. Customization means work. Traditions that survive need to survive for years and
generations. If we are to form such a tradition, and I think that we should strive to do so, we
will need it to be able to defend and pass itself down from father to son, from mother to
daughter, to survive the constant pressures of the world. The constraint binds us, and we
must consider it even now.
The ﬁrst step, however, is still to take back our lives, protect ourselves to get to a place
where we can think. This is one way that starts.
 


Confessions of a Slacker
Crossposting the entire thing from Putanumonit in honor of the Slack sequence.
Go read Slack, it's short and important.
If you're not a slacker, that post might change your life and explain why you feel like you
have no control over your own life despite doing well on almost all counts. If you are a
slacker, like me, this post gives our philosophy a name and provides a deﬁnition: slack is the
absence of binding constraints on behavior.
Zvi's post is abstract on purpose. I'll continue his mission by getting more speciﬁc and, of
course, by putting a num on it. To the latter purpose, I'll modify the deﬁnition of slack to
make it quantiﬁable:
Slack is the distance from binding constraints on your behavior. 
Keep your Distance
Slack is a function of many resources. Running out of any single vital resource is enough to
constrain your behavior: make you do something you didn't want to, or prevent you from
doing something you want. Freedom requires having spare time, spare money, spare energy,
spare weirdness points, available friends etc.  The "slack as distance" formula looks a little
something like this:
Slack disappears when the spare capacity of any single resource goes to zero, regardless of
how much of everything else you have. Maintaining slack requires balancing all the
important resources, making sure to shore up the scarcest resources ﬁrst.
My grandma just paid to replace a pipe on her ﬂoor that was ﬂooding the entire apartment
building. The other 20 tenants were supposed to participate in the cost, but due to diﬀusion
of responsibility and greed, they decided collectively to weasel out of contributing. A lawyer
suggested that my grandma should go to court but she refused, for reasons of slack. The
question isn't whether the time in court will be worth the money gained, but whether
the lack of this particular sum of money will force my grandma into something as
undesirable as spending weeks litigating against her neighbors. It almost certainly wouldn't.
At her age, my grandma's scarcest resource is stress-free time. She's not trading it for
money.
It's remarkable how many people fuck up by doing the opposite: concentrating on the
resources that are easiest for them to obtain, and neglecting their most pressing needs.
One half of Americans have less than $400 to spare, including millions of middle-class people
who make and spend tens of thousands each year. The author of this shocking article is an
educated professional and a family man. He has accumulated many achievements, but he
forgot to save any cash to pay the water bill. On the other side, I have friends from business
school with six ﬁgures to spare in their bank account and not a single hour to relax.

Whatever resource is scarcest for people is probably the one they aren't good at dealing
with, and for this reason, thinking about it is aversive. It's easier just to ignore it. But an
ignored constraint doesn't go away, it still binds you.
Currency Exchange
When no single resource is very scarce, you can keep it that way by ﬁguring out the
exchange rates between resources and making trade-oﬀs based on those. Trading-oﬀ "life
currencies" is a subject I discussed in detail before, but slack-based thinking oﬀers a good
way to calculate the correct exchange rates. For example: how much is an hour of free time
worth to you in dollars?
The slack-based exchange rate is [spare money] / [spare time], when the deﬁnition of
"spare" is derived from the deﬁnition of slack. Spare X = how much X you can lose before
being forced into undesirable behavior.
Example: you make $60,000 a year, put $15,000 in retirement, save $5,000 in cash and
spend the remaining $40,000. Of those, $30,000 are for necessities and $10,000 are for
things you can live without like fancy clothes and expensive restaurants. This means that
you can cover your necessities for $45,000 and since you make $60,000, that means you
have $15,000 a year in spare cash. That's how much money you can give up before being
forced to change your lifestyle signiﬁcantly (e.g. move to a cheaper apartment) or
jeopardizing your retirement.
Do the same math for time spent: let's say you spend 10 hours a week on activities other
than those you have to do (work, sleep) or those you really want to do (ping pong). These 10
hours a week (or ~500 a year) aren't the entirety of your free time, they're the hours you
can aﬀord to lose without having to sacriﬁce important activities.
In our example, $15,000 spare money each year and 500 spare hours imply an exchange
rate of $30/hour. This is a good baseline to consider trade-oﬀs against.If you can pay a maid
service $75 to save you three hours of house cleaning ($25/hour), you should take the
opportunity because you're converting money to time at a good exchange rate.
Notice that once you've made a trade-oﬀ, the exchange rate shifts. If the cleaner comes
once a month it saves you 36 hours each year and costs you $900. You now have $14,100 to
spare and 536 hours, so the new implied exchange rate is 14100/536 = $26.3/hour. Money
became scarcer relative to free time, and you'll be less inclined to keep trading it away.
One danger that lurks when calculating the trade-oﬀs is forgetting about the important
resources that are hard to measure. A while after my friend hired a housekeeper, his
girlfriend remarked that if they had done this earlier she probably would have had a lot more
sex with him. What's the resource that was binding the girlfriend before the housekeeper
showed up? I don't think it's spare time or even energy. If you spend your last hour and
ounce of energy dusting shelves instead of making love, slack isn't the problem in your
relationship.
So what is it? As usual, we shall ﬁnd the answer in the ancient teaching of the Hebrew sages.
Abraham and Three Angels, Fiasella Domenico
The only time in the Old Testament when God tells a bald-faced lie is when informing
Abraham (age 99) and Sarah (88) of their upcoming pregnancy. When Sarah hears the news
she laughs incredulously, wondering how can she have a son when "... my husband is
old" (Genesis 18, 12:13). But when God informs Abraham of Sarah's reaction he quotes her

as saying "Will I really have a child, now that I am old?". God obfuscates the fact that it's
Abraham's age she laughed about.
According to the Talmud, this story teaches the importance of "peace in the family" (shlom-
bayit). It's a resource so important that it's worth God lying to preserve it. Shlom-bayit is
hard to quantify, but your behavior is as constrained when you've lost your partner's
goodwill as if you were down to your last dollar or minute. When maintaining your slack
according to formula, don't forget to count the uncountable resources too.
Earphones
I ﬁnd it much easier to untangle my earphones when I hold the entire cable in a loose lump
in my hand so that none of the wires are pulled taut.
Exploration
One of the main things that slack gives you is optionality, the freedom to change your plans.
The value of optionality varies a lot depending on what one is up to, whether you're
exploring or exploiting. "Exploit" is when a single best option is available to you, and you
pursue it single-mindedly. For example, I'm starting an internship at a dream company in a
few weeks, and I will care about nothing except getting a full-time position there. I won't be
intersted in other employment options, and I won't need slack for anything besides work.
"Exploration" is when a lot of paths are open, when there's great potential but little certainty.
That's when slack is valuable, it allows you to pursue the opportunities. I learned to
appreciate slack in my own life after messing up a critical exploration phase due to
slacklessness, my college years.
When I was 18, I joined a very selective academic oﬃcer training program. We pursued a
double degree in math and physics condensed into three years, along with intensive military
training and enough chores to be a bummer. We had negative slack: no money, no freedom,
and a daily to-do list that would take about 20 hours to complete, but only if you were fresh
oﬀ 8 hours of sleep. I dropped out after a hectic two years. I realized that not only did I
remember almost nothing from the classes, I didn't even know if I liked physics, or the army,
or if I actually wanted to be an oﬃcer.
The same year my wife-to-be enrolled in a community college without much pressure to do
anything other than study and to try stuﬀ. She made lifelong friends, learned Japanese, tried
out a bunch of subjects and eventually discovered and fell in love with biology. Then, she
could shift fully into exploit mode: she aced all the available biology class, transferred to a
good university where completed a degree in biology in two years, and got into a leading
graduate program. She became a biologist because she had several years when she didn't
have to decide what she would become.
I made up for my slackless undergrad experience by going to a slack-friendly business
school. I had time to play every single intramural sport, go on a lot of drunk dates, and
become a regular writer for a satire magazine which I spent more time on than all my
homework combined. Writing satire later turned into a paying gig, a short but exciting stand-
up career in NYC, and eventually Putanumonit when I couldn't get anyone to pay to hear my
jokes. This blog only exists because in the last few years I've guarded my slack jealously.
And yet, I see smart people in elite universities fall into the same trap I did originally. Very
prestigious schools are very competitive, and competition will incinerate every bit of slack
you have. Heavy course loads leave students little slack to fool around with satire, squash, or
even fooling around. Once you start pursuing a major there's little slack to learn anything
else, and once you graduate with a load of debt there's no slack to do anything but take the
ﬁrst paying job on oﬀer. A less prestigious university that requires half the time, the eﬀort

and the money of an elite school often oﬀers a better education simply by leaving you with
slack and the freedom to explore.
The same is true for other exploration activities like travel (on long trips, I try to leave 50% of
the days unscheduled), job hunting, and dating. Slacklessness brings desperation, and
desperation leads to making the sort of choices that your friends will shake their heads about
a decade later. Fight for your slack, and give yourself it.
Amos Tversky Said
The secret to doing good research is always to be a little underemployed. You
waste years by not being able to waste hours.
How much time did he waste coming up with this pithy aphorism? It was worth it.

Slack for your belief system
Follow-up to Zvi's post on Slack
You can have Slack in your life. But you can also have Slack in your belief system.
Initially, this seems like it might be bad.
Won't Slack result in a lack of precision? If I give myself Slack to believe in whatever,
won't I just end up with a lot of wrong beliefs? Shouldn't I always be trying to decrease
the amount of Slack in my beliefs, always striving to walk the narrow, true path?
Claims:
1. For some things, the only way to stumble upon the Truth is to have some Slack.
In other words, having no Slack in your belief system can result in getting stuck
at local optima.
2. Having Slack allows you to use fake frameworks in a way that isn't epistemically
harmful.
3. If you are, in fact, just correct, I guess you should have zero Slack. But—just
checking—are you ALSO correct about how you come to Know Things? If your
way of coming to conclusions is even a little oﬀ, giving yourself zero Slack might
be dangerous. (Having zero Slack in your meta process multiplies the problem of
no-Slack to all downstream beliefs.)
4. I'm willing to make the more unbacked, harder-to-deﬁne claim that there exists
no individual human alive who should have zero Slack in their beliefs, on the
meta level. (In other words, no human has a truth-seeking process that will
reliably get all the right answers.)
[ I want to note that I fully believe I could be wrong about all four claims here, or
thinking about this in the entirely wrong way. So ﬁght me. ]
Now, I'm going to speciﬁcally discuss Slack in one's meta process.
So, while I can apply the concept of Slack to individual beliefs themselves (aka
"holding beliefs lightly"), I am applying the concept more to the question of "How do I
come to know/understand anything or or call a thing true?"
So, I'm not discussing examples of "I believe X, with more or less Slack." I'm
discussing the diﬀerence between, "Doing a bunch of studies is the only way to know
things" (less Slack) vs. "Doing a bunch of studies is how I currently come to know
things, but I'm open to other ways" (more Slack).
The less Slack there is in your process for forming beliefs, the more constraints you
have to abide before being able to claim you've come to understand something.
Examples of such constraints include:
I only buy it if it has had at least one peer-reviewed RCT.
This framework seems like it'll lead to conﬁrmation bias, so I will ignore it.
If it involves politics or tribalism or status, it can't have any truth to it.
If it's self-contradictory / paradoxical, it has to be one way or the other.

I can't imagine this being true or useful because my gut reaction to it is
negative.
I don't feel anything about it, so it must be meaningless.
This doesn't conform to my narrative or worldview. In fact it's oﬀensive to
consider, so I won't.
If I thought this, it would likely result in harm to myself or others, so I can't think
it.
It's only true if I can prove it.
It's only worth considering if it's been tested empirically.
I should discard models that aren't made of gears.
Note that sometimes, it is good to have such constraints, at least for now.
Not everyone can interact with facts, claims, and beliefs without some harm to their
epistemics. In fact, most people cannot, I claim. (And further, I believe this to be one
of the most important problems in rationality.)
That said, I see a lot of people's orientations as:
"My belief-forming process says this thing isn't true, and in fact this entire class of
thing is likely false and not worth digging into. You seem to be actively engaging with
[class of thing] and claiming there is truth in it. That seems highly dubious—there is
something wrong with your belief-forming process."
This is a reasonable stance to take.
After all, lots of things aren't worth digging into. And lots of people have bad truth-
seeking processes. Theirs may very well be worse than yours; you don't have to
consider something just because it's in front of you.
But if you notice yourself unwilling to engage with [entire class of thing]... to me this
indicates something is suboptimal.
Over time, it seems good to aim for being able to engage with more classes of things,
rather than fewer.
If something is politically charged, yes, your beliefs are at risk, and you may be better
oﬀ avoiding the topic altogether. But—wouldn't it be nice, if one day, you could wade
through the mire of politics and come out the other side, clean? Epistemics in tact?
Even better, you come out the other side having realized new truths about the world?
I guess if I'm going to be totally honest, the reason I am saying this is because I feel
annoyed when people dismiss entire [classes of thing] for reasons like, "That part of
the territory is really swampy and dangerous! Going in there is bad, and you're
probably compromised."
At least some of the time, the thing that is going on is the person just ﬁgured out how
to navigate swamps.
But instead, I feel like the person lacks Slack in their belief-forming process and is also
trying to enforce this lack of Slack onto others.
From the inside, I imagine this feels like, "No one can navigate swamps, and anyone
who says they are is probably terribly mistaken or naive about how truth-seeking
works, so I should inform them of the danger."

From the inside, Slack will feel incorrect or potentially dangerous. Without constraints,
the person may feel like they'll go oﬀ the rails—maybe they'll even end up believing in
*gasp* horoscopes or *gasp* the existence of a Judeo-Christian God.
My greatest fear is not having false beliefs. My greatest fear is getting trapped into a
particular deﬁnition of truth-seeking, such that I permanently end up with many false
beliefs or large gaps in my map.
The two things I do to avoid this are:
a) Learn more skills for navigating tricky territories. For example, one of the skills is
noticing a belief that's in my mind because it would be beneﬁcial for me to believe it,
i.e. it makes me feel good in a certain way or I expect good things to happen as a
result—say, it'd make a person like me more if I believed it. This likely requires a fair
amount of introspective capacity.
b) Be open to the idea that other people have truth-seeking methods that I don't. That
they're seeing entire swaths of reality I can't see. Be curious about that, and try to
learn more. Develop taste around this. Maintain some Slack, so I don't become
myopic.

Sacred Cash
Previously: Categories of Sacredness, Eternal, and Hearthstone Economy versus Magic
Economy, Slack
Related (Compass Rose): Kidneys, Trade, Sacredness and Space Travel
Remember when money was sacred?
Thanks to The Great Transformation, there is an increasingly free market in money. We
spend money continuously, and get paid continuously.
This is relatively new. Or at least, its universality is relatively new.
It wasn't so long ago that money was sacred at the bank. They had to give you a
toaster instead.
My parents grew up in a diﬀerent world. They taught me money was sacred. You had a
job for a ﬁxed number of hours, paying a ﬁxed amount. That was all the money you
got. Earning more was very diﬃcult. Side jobs were lousy and rare. You'd spend lots of
time to sell unwanted items at yard or sidewalk sales, at severe discounts. Everyone
kept a strict budget. The edge was never far away.
Money spent other than on necessities was a special treat, a grand honor or dire
emergency.
This cultural attitude is hard to learn. It is also hard to unlearn. It is quite jarring when
you ﬁrst see it violated.
The Profane
When I moved out to Denver to work at Social Games on the Cyperpunk TCG, I met a
group that neither had enough money, had ways to earn more money nor treated
money as sacred. 
They'd think nothing of paying a dollar for a Slurpee. On payday, they'd all get
takeout. Far from payday, they'd (literally in one case) search their seat cushions to
ﬁnd change with which to gas up their motorcycle, to get to work.
Anything they had, that could have been reasonably sold, would eventually have
been.
I did not understand.
In a start-up with one angel investor who lacked the ability to reinvest, and little hope
of raising additional funds, they did not prepare for the inevitable cash crunch while
trying to sell enough to stem the bleeding. I don't know if we could have stabilized if
given a few more months, but we had a shot only with those months. We likely fail
anyway, but to see it all thrown away infuriated me.
MetaMed's ﬁnal blow was similar. My replacement as CEO increased our spend,
leaving insuﬃcient runway to do the things necessary to raise additional funds, and
failed to realize (despite my repeated warnings) that this meant 0% chance of

success. The plan's timeline didn't work. It was incoherent. Again, we probably fail
anyway, but to do that which inevitably fails? Infuriating.
I did not understand.
What was wrong with these people? Money was sacred. 
Sure, it wasn't automatically sacred, but it was sacred in context. Supply was limited.
Being ﬂush today doesn't change that.
On The Wire, a character who not a day ago was about to be killed for lack of funds
burns hundred dollar bills in a bar. His explanation? "When I'm ﬂush, I'm ﬂush."
In Denver I had some savings, but fully understood I had a terrible salary and acted
accordingly. I rented a $400 apartment, lived on $1,000 a month, agonized over
buying an occasional luxurious Quiznos sandwich or a pizza, and worked to solve the
local Indian casino poker game (it had a strange unique structure for legal reasons) to
pay the rent while getting paid in equity to help the company.
Later, I had to train myself out of that. I taught myself that increasingly large amounts
of money weren't sacred to me. It is still a sin (in my code) to waste money or make a
bad trade, even for trivial size. I've kept some amount of sacredness. I think this is
important in a makes-my-12-rules-for-life kind of way. Don't lose that cringe! But
'throw money at the problem' is an option, and 'buy it even if it's expensive because
you'll enjoy it' has its place.
Slack Tax
Money moving from sacred to non-sacred is a huge change.
When money is sacred, so are things one can buy. All worthwhile possessions are
prized possessions.
When money isn't sacred, neither are things one can sell. Only things you cannot
eﬃciently sell can still be prized. Potential trade becomes an enemy.
When one is ﬂush, one buys experiences, memories and hard-to-sell assets.
If one does not, one falls victim to the wealth tax.
The slack tax takes many forms.
In Denver, it took the relatively benign form of obliviousness and hyperbolic
discounting. People spent money on themselves, voluntarily, acting as if they were
more wealthy than they were, leaving them poorer still.
It has less benign forms. Governments and other bandits look for wealth and take it.
Sometimes those bandits are your friends, family and neighbors. A little giving back is
a good thing, but in many cultures demands for help and redistribution rapidly
approach 100% - life is tough, and your fellow tribe members, or at least family
members, are endless pits of need, so any wealth that can be given away must be
hidden if you want to remain in good standing. Savings, security and investment in
anything but status are all but impossible. There is no hope for prosperity.

In between is commercial pressure, price discrimination and hold-up problems. Agents
see free energy and work to extract it by charging for access to complementary
goods, holding out promises, creating perception of needs and manufacturing
expensive status competitions. The manufacturer of a key component, or the head of
the union, demands almost all of your proﬁt margins. Products advertise miracle
eﬀects that might solve your problems; you know they're lying, but what else is there
to do? And what would you do without the hot sneakers, the latest handbag, the hip
new phone or the most prestigious college degree?
The most insidious traps are explicit slack traps. You must send the signal that you
have spent all your resources. Any diamond (or college, or house..) is ﬁne, so long as
it cost you everything you had, so I know you love me. You can raise more capital for
your start-up, but ﬁrst you must be broke, or it would be irresponsible to give you
more yet. Also would mean I wouldn't have as much leverage. 
The Slack Tax's most popular form is the Wealth Tax. But it works on any resource.
Thus, for example, the need to create socially acceptable, legibly sacred time.
Without strong defenses, those forces out to get us will ﬁnd a way. All slack, and thus
hope, will be lost.

Guarding Slack vs Substance
Builds on concepts from:
Slack
Goodheart's Imperius
Nobody Does the Thing They are Supposedly Doing
Summary: If you're trying to preserve your sanity (or your employees') by scaling
back on the number of things you're trying to do... make sure not to accidentally scale
back on things that were important-but-harder-to-see, in favor of things that aren't as
important but more easily evaluated.
Epistemic Eﬀort: Had a conversation, had some immediate instinctive reactions to it,
did not especially reﬂect on it. Hope to ﬂesh out how to manage these tradeoﬀs in the
comments.
Zvi introduced the term "Slack" to the rationaljargonsphere a few months ago, and I
think it's the most clearly useful new piece of jargon we've seen in a while.
Normally, when someone coins a new term, I immediately ﬁnd people shoehorning it
into conversations and concepts where it doesn't quite ﬁt. (I do this myself an
embarrassing amount, and the underlying motivation is clearly "I want to sound
smart" which bodes ill).
By contrast, I experienced an explosion of people jargon-dropping Slack into their
conversations and every single instance was valid. Lack-of-slack was a problem loads
of people had been dealing with, and having a handle for it was a perfect instance of a
new name enabling higher level discussion.
This hints at something that should be alarming: "slack" is a useful term because
nobody has enough of it.
In particular, it looks like many organizations I'm familiar with run at something like
-10% slack, instead of the 40% slack that apparently is optimal across many domains.
Gworley noted in the comments of Zvi's post:
If you work with distributed systems, by which I mean any system that must pass
information between multiple, tightly integrated subsystems, there is a well
understood concept of maximum sustainable load and we know that number to be
roughly 60% of maximum possible load for all systems.
The probability that one subsystem will have to wait on another increases
exponentially with the total load on the system and the load level that maximizes
throughput (total amount of work done by the system over some period of time)
comes in just above 60%. If you do less work you are wasting capacity (in terms of
throughput); if you do more work you will gum up the works and waste time
waiting even if all the subsystems are always busy.
We normally deal with this in engineering contexts, but as is so often the case this
property will hold for basically anything that looks suﬃciently like a distributed

system. Thus the "operate at 60% capacity" rule of thumb will maximize
throughput in lots of scenarios: assembly lines, service-oriented architecture
software, coordinated work within any organization, an individual's work (since it
is normally made up of many tasks that information must be passed between with
the topology being spread out over time rather than space), and perhaps most
surprisingly an individual's mind-body.
"Slack" is a decent way of putting this, but we can be pretty precise and say you
need ~40% slack to optimize throughput: more and you tip into being "lazy", less
and you become "overworked".
I've talked with a few people people about burnout, and other ways that lack-of-slack
causes problems. I had come to the conclusion that people should probably
drastically-cut-back on the amount of things they're trying to do, so that they can
aﬀord to do them well, for the long term.
Oliver Habryka made a surprising case for why this might be a bad idea, at least if
implemented carelessly. (The rest of this post is basically a summary of a month-ago
conversation in which Oliver explained some ideas/arguments to me. I'm fairly
conﬁdent I remember the key points, but if I missed something, apologies)
Veneer vs Substance
Example 1: Web Developer Mockups
(This example is slightly contrived - a professional web developer probably wouldn't
make this particular mistake, but hopefully illustrates the point)
Say you're a novice web-developer, and a client hires you to make a website. The
client doesn't understand anything about web development, but they can easily tell if
a website is ugly or pretty. They give you some requirements, including 4 menu items
at the top of the page.
You have a day before the ﬁrst meeting, and you want to make a good ﬁrst
impression. You have enough time that you could build a site with a good underlying
structure, but no CSS styling. You know from experience the client will be
unimpressed.
So instead you throw together a quick-and-dirty-but-stylish website that meets their
requirements. The four menu items ﬂow beautifully across the top of the page.
They see it. They're happy. They add some more requirements to add more
functionality, which you're happy to comply with.
Then eventually they say "okay, now we need to add a 5th menu-item."
And... it turns out adding the 5th menu item a) totally wrecks the visual ﬂow of the
page you designed, b) you can't even do it easily because you threw together
something that manually speciﬁed individual menu items and corresponding pages,
instead of an easily scalable menu-item/page system.

Your site looked good, but it wasn't actually built for the most important longterm
goals of your client, and neither you nor your client noticed. And now you have more
work to do than you normally would have.
Example 2: Running a Conference
If you run a conference, people will notice if you screw up the logistics and people
don't have food or all the volunteers are stressed out and screwing up.
They won't notice if the breaks between sessions are 10 minutes long instead of 30.
But much of the value of most conferences isn't the presentations. It's in the
networking, the bouncing around of ideas. The diﬀerence between 10 minute breaks
and 30 minute ones may be the diﬀerence between people actually being able to
generate valuable new ideas together, and people mostly rushing from one
presentation to another without time to connect.
"Well, simple", you might say. "It's not that hard to make the breaks 30 minutes long.
Just do that, and then still put as much eﬀort into logistics as you can."
But, would have you have thought to do that, if you were preoccupied with logistics?
How many other similar types of decisions are available for you to make? How many
of them will you notice if you don't dedicate time to speciﬁcally thinking about how to
optimize the conference for producing connections, novel insights and new projects?
Say your default plan is to spend 12 hours a day for three months working your ass oﬀ
to get both the logistics done and to think creatively about what the most important
goals of the conference are and how to achieve them.
(realistically, this probably isn't actually your default plan, because thinking creatively
and agentily is pretty hard and people default to doing "obvious" things like getting
high-proﬁle speakers)
But, you've also read a bunch of stuﬀ about slack and noticed yourself being stressed
out a lot. You try to get help to outsource one of the tasks, but getting people you can
really count on is hard.
It looks like you need to do a lot of the key tasks yourself. You're stretched thin. You've
got a lot of people pinging you with questions so you're running on manager-schedule
instead of setting aside time for deep work.
You've run conferences before, and you have a lot of visceral experiences of people
yelling at you for not making sure there was enough food and other logistical
screwups. You have a lot of current ﬁres going on and people who are yelling about
them right now.
You don't have a lot of salient examples of people yelling at you for not having long
enough breaks, and nobody is yelling at you right now to allocate deep work towards
creatively optimizing the conference.
So as you try to regain sanity and some sense of measured control, the things that
tend to get dropped are the things least visible, without regard for whether they are
the most substantive, valuable things you could have done.

So What To Do?
Now, I do have a strong impression that a lot of organizations and people I know are
running at -10% slack. This is for understandable reasons: The World is On Fire,
metaphorically and literally. There's a long list of Really Important Things that need
doing.
Getting them set in motion soon is legitimately important.
A young organization has a lot of things they need to get going at once in order to
prove themselves (both to funders, and to the people involved).
There aren't too many people who are able/willing to help. There's even fewer people
who demonstratably can be counted on to tackle complex tasks in a proactive, agenty
fashion. Those people end up excessively relied upon, often pressured into taking on
more than they can handle (or barely exactly how much they can handle and then as
soon as things go wrong, other failures start to snowball)
[note: this is not commentary on any particular organization, just a general sense I get
from talking to a few people, both in the rationalsphere but also generally in most
small organizations]
What do we do about this?
Answers would probably vary based on speciﬁc context. Some obvious-if-hard answers
are obvious-if-hard:
Try to buy oﬀ-the-shelf solutions for things that oﬀ-the-shelf-solutions exist for.
(This runs into a diﬀerent problem which is that you risk overpaying for
enterprise software that isn't very good, which is a whole separate blogpost)
Where possible, develop systems that dramatically simplify problems.
Where possible, get more help, while generally developing your capacity to
distribute tasks eﬀectively over larger numbers of people.
Understand that if you're pushing yourself (or your employees) for a major
product release, you're not actually gaining time or energy - you're borrowing
time/energy from the future. If you're spending a month in crunch time, expect
to have a followup month where everyone is kinda brain dead. This may be
worth it, and being able to think more explicitly about the tradeoﬀs being made
may be helpful.
You're probably doing things like that, as best you can. My remaining thought is
something like "do fewer things, but give yourself a lot more time to do them." (For
example, I ran the 2012 Solstice almost entirely by myself, but I gave myself an entire
year to do it, and it was my only major creative project that year)
If you're a small organization with a lot of big ideas that all feel interdependent, and if
you notice that your staﬀ are constantly overworked and burning out, it may be
necessary to prune those ideas back and focus on 1-3 major projects each year that
you have can aﬀord to do well without resorting to crunch time.
Allocate time months in advance (both for thinking through the creative, deep
underlying principles behind your project, as well as setting logistical systems in
motion that'll make things easier).

None of this feels like a satisfying solution to me, but all feels like useful pieces of the
puzzle to have in mind.

The Amish, and Strategic Norms
around Technology
I was reading Legal Systems Very Diﬀerent From Ours by David Friedman. The chapter
on the Amish made a couple interesting claims, which changed my conception of that
culture (although I'm not very conﬁdent that the Amish would endorse these claims as
fair descriptions).
Strategic Norms Around Technology
The Amish relationship to technology is not "stick to technology from the 1800s", but
rather "carefully think about how technology will aﬀect your culture, and only include
technology that does what you want."
So, electric heaters are ﬁne. Central heating in a building is not. This is because if
there's a space-heater in the living room, this encourages the family to congregate
together. Whereas if everyone has heating in their room, they're more likely to spend
time apart from each other.
Some communities allow tractors, but only if they don't have rubber tires. This makes
them good for tilling ﬁelds but bad for driving around.
Cars and telephones are particularly important not to allow, because easy
transportation and communication creates a slippery slope to full-connection to the
outside world. And a lot of the Amish lifestyle depends on cutting themselves oﬀ from
the various pressures and incentives present in the rest of the world.
Some Amish communities allow people to borrow telephones or cars from non-Amish
neighbors. I might have considered this hypocritical. But in the context of "strategic
norms of technology", it need not be. The important bit is to add friction to
transportation and communication.
Competitive Dictatorship
Oﬃcially, most Amish congregations operate via something-like-consensus (I'm not
sure I understood this). But Friedman's claim is that in practice, most people tend to
go with what the local bishop says. This makes a bishop something like a dictator.
But, there are lots of Amish communities, and if you don't like the direction a bishop is
pushing people in, or how they are resolving disputes, you can leave. There is a
spectrum of communities ranging in how strict they are about about various rules, and
they make decisions mostly independently.
So there is not only strategic norms around technology, but a fairly interesting, semi-
systematic exploration of those norms.
Other Applications

I wouldn't want to be Amish-in-particular, but the setup here is very interesting to me.
I know some people who went to MAPLE, a monastery program. While there, there
were limits on technology that meant, after 9pm, you basically had two choices: read,
or go to bed. The choices were strongly reinforced by the social and physical
environment. And this made it much easier to make choices they endorsed.
Contrast this with my current house, where a) you face basically inﬁnite choices about
to spend your time, and b) in practice, the nightly choices often end up being
something like "stay up till 1am playing minecraft with housemates" or "stay up till
2am playing minecraft with housemates."
I'm interested in the question "okay, so... my goals are not the Amish goals. But, what
are my goals exactly, and is there enough consensus around particular goals to make
valid choices around norms and technology other than 'anything goes?'"
There are issues you face that make this hard, though:
Competition with the Outside World - The Amish system works because it cuts
itself oﬀ from the outside world, and its most important technological choices directly
cause that. Your business can't get outcompeted by someone else who opens up their
shop on Sundays because there is nobody who opens their shop on Sundays.
You also might have goals that directly involve the outside world.
(The Amish also have good relationships with the government such that they can get
away with implementing their own legal systems and get exceptions for things like
school-laws. If you want to do something on their scale, you both would need to not
attract the ire of the government, and be good enough at rolling your own legal
system to not screw things up and drive people away)
Lack of Mid-Scale-Coordination - I've tried to implement 10pm bedtimes. It fails,
horribly, because I frequently attend events that last till midnight or later. Everyone
could shift their entire sleep schedule forward, maybe. But also...
People Are Diﬀerent - Some of people's needs are cultural. But some are biological,
and some needs are maybe due to environmental factors that happened over decades
and can't be changed on a dime.
Some people do better with rules and structure. Some people ﬂourish more with
ﬂexibility. Some people need rules and structure but diﬀerent rules and structure than
other people.
This all makes it fairly hard to coordinate on norms.
Contenders for Change
Given the above, I think it makes most sense to:
Look for opportunities explore norms and technology-use at the level of
individuals, households, and small organizations (these seem like natural
clusters with small numbers of stakeholders, where you can either get
consensus or have a dictator).

While doing so, choose norms that are locally stable, that don't require
additional cooperation outside yourself, your household or your org.
For example, I could imagine an entire household trying out a rule, like "the household
internet turns oﬀ at 10pm", or "all the lights turn reddish at night so it's easier to get
to sleep"

Slack gives you space to notice/reﬂect
on subtle things
Followup to "My slack budget: 3 surprise problems per week"
Previously, I thought the reasons to preserve slack in your life (or in your organization)
were to:
Avoid using up all of your resources
Avoid hitting a crisis where you suddenly have multiple surprise problems, and
you have no choice but to either do a shitty job handling all of them, or
deliberately not handle some of them at all (and deal with the consequences)
Avoid feeling really unpleasant
Allow you to live up to principles / be more pro-social.
This year in December/January, the Lightcone Infrastructure team (where I work) took
on a large number of diﬃcult projects at once. I was thinking about how wise/unwise
this was, and chatting with John Wentworth about it. I listed the problems-with-lack-of-
slack.
He said (something like): "Oh, that's not the point of slack. Or, not the part I'm most
interested in. The point of slack is to give you the space to notice subtle things and
think about them."
A rough model is something like, here are three types of things you can do:
1. You can take actions on whatever stuﬀ it is you like to do on-purpose. (Typically
your day job, or fun projects, or whatever)
2. You can rest/recover/do-random-fun-things.
3. You can... be cognizant of stuﬀ going that isn't immediately relevant to the ﬁrst
two things, and mull it over, and notice new, potentially fruitful trains of thought
about them.
When you're got too many things to do and stuﬀ is constantly exploding and
demanding your attention, #3 is the ﬁrst thing to go. You often need to be putting out
ﬁres (#1), and if you do that too much and did into energy reserves your body will
eventually be like "No, screw that, time to burn out for a bit and spend a week tired
and recovering." (#2)
But, there won't be a moment where you experience a clear failure-and-control-
mechanism that pushes you to spend time on #3. You just... won't notice a thing that
you might have noticed.
And this is particularly important when you're working on problems you don't
understand how to solve (such as AI alignment, or how to improve institutions, or
learn/teach rationality, or, just, any ol' problem in your life you're currently confused
about, or maybe haven't even yet realized that you have) 
In the explore/exploit dichotomy, when solving a problem-you-don't-understand,
having a train of thoughts in "explore" mode is pretty valuable. Slack gives you space
for your shower thoughts to be in explore mode.

My slack budget: 3 surprise problems
per week
Previously: Slack
In a couple earlier articles I urged people to adopt strategies that reliably maintain a
margin of "30% slack." I've seen lots of people burn out badly (myself included), and
preserving a margin of resources such that you don't risk burning out seems quite
important to me. 
But I realized a) "30% slack" isn't very clear, and b) this is an important enough
concept it should really have a top-level post.
So, to be a bit more obvious:
Maintain enough slack that you can absorb 3 surprise problems happening
to you in a week, without dipping into reserves.
"Surprise problems" can take multiple forms, and cost diﬀerent types of reserves.
These can be ﬁnancial expenses you didn't know about (whoops, I needed to buy
some medicine), or cognitive attention (whoops, I need to ﬁgure out what medicine to
buy) or stress (whoops, I'm sick, and now I need to talk to a bunch of doctors while
being kinda exhausted).
These can be problems happening to you, or problems happening to friends that you
care about.
Why "3 surprises", and not just one? Because at least a couple times a year I
personally run into 3-surprises-in-a-week. And sometimes I get hit with much bigger
things require me to burn my reserves, and if I didn't have a habit of ensuring my
reserves I just wouldn't be able to do those things at all.
I was motivated to write this today because, last week, four problems came up. I had
recently taken on two major projects; a community institution was in trouble, and a
friend was hurt and needed help. I only had bandwidth to deal with 3 of those. I
realized that not only was this a particularly bad week, but I had let too many ongoing
responsibilities accumulate.
The weekend came 'round, right as I hit exactly-zero-slack. I needed time to recover,
but I had made some time-sensitive commitments to help with some of the above
things, and I ended up having to spend the weekend doing a more constrained version
of those outstanding obligations, while carefully recovering.
Being Pro-Social Requires Slack
I think an important part of being a good friend, community member or eﬀective
altruist, is taking care of yourself. I think if you can't absorb 3 surprise problems per
week, it probably make sense to prioritize ﬁxing that above most other things. 
"But my friend is in trouble!"

That's legitimately sad, but if you can't absorb 3 surprise problems per week, you are
probably not going to be able to help your friend next week. Moreover, you might burn
out, then you will need to be asking other friends for help, and you might need to ask
that at a time when they were also hurting. 
Take care of yourself.
"But the world is in trouble!"
The world is always in trouble. There is no end to the things you might hypothetically
do to help it. It is virtuous to help. It is not virtuous to help in a way that runs the risk
of you becoming one of the people who need help and are adding to the problem.
"But maybe I can do this and it'll be ﬁne?"
One of the legitimately tricky things is that, sure, often you can roll the dice and come
out ﬁne this time. Many extra tasks you take on are usually okay, but have, say, a
10% chance of turning out to involve much bigger responsibilities than you thought
you were committing to. You can skirt by a few times and be okay.
But, well, if you do that 10 times, one of the times you will turn out not to be okay.
Developing intuitions around how risky actions are, and developing policies for how
often to do them, is pretty important.
"But I made commitments!"
I take commitments pretty seriously. Trust is one of the sources of slack. So if you've
suddenly realized you've overcommitted, often the solution is not to abruptly abandon
all of them. 
But, it is often necessary to abandon at least some, while making sure to take
ownership of that abandonment, perhaps with a promise to pay back a favor later.
Develop Weekly Capacity and Build Reserves
That all said, I quite sympathize if you see your friends hurting, or the world on ﬁre, or
even just lots of cool parties that you want to go to even though you're tired.
There are various things you can do to build up that capacity. Get a better job.
Carefully cultivate friendships that are naturally restorative most of the time. Find a
good living situation. Invest in habits that that eventually make things easier.
This isn't a selﬁsh thing to do for yourself, it should be coming out of your long-term
budget for improving the world. 

Slack Has Positive Externalities For
Groups
You ever have one of those group projects where you all need to ﬁnd a time to meet,
but some or all of the group members have packed schedules, so you pull out the
whenisgood and it turns out the only times that work are 2-2:15 pm on Thursday or
6:30-7:30 am on Tuesday?
For this sort of scheduling problem, the best group members are those with lots of
slack in their schedule - people who either have lots of time available, or have very
ﬂexible time commitments which can move around to accommodate a group meeting.
But if my schedule is ﬂexible, note that most of the beneﬁts of that ﬂexibility are
captured by the group as a whole, not by me: my ﬂexibility mostly allows the group to
accommodate less-ﬂexible members.
The slack in my schedule creates positive externalities for the group. I mostly control
how much slack to create/maintain in my schedule, but a large chunk of the beneﬁt
goes to other people. This means I'm incentivized to create/maintain less-than-optimal
slack in my schedule.
Once you look for it, this shows up in other guises too: many diﬀerent ﬂavors of slack
create positive externalities for groups. In general, we should expect people to
create/maintain less slack than would be socially optimal, and this in turn will make
groups less functional. What do other forms of this look like, and what can we do
about it?
Many Flavors of Slack
A few common forms of slack:
Financial: money not budgeted for anything in particular, or which can easily be
spent on something else instead, is ﬁnancial slack.
Time: time not scheduled for anything in particular, or which can easily be
rescheduled, is time slack.
Space: space not used for anything in particular, or which can easily be used for
something else, is space slack.
Emotional: capacity for excess stress is emotional slack.
Social: multiple social groups which one can fall back on, or the ability to make
new friends quickly, provide social slack.
We can also separate short-term vs long-term slack for each of these. For instance, a
bank may have lots of capital to invest, but limited liquidity, so they can't move their
capital around quickly: high long-term ﬁnancial slack but limited short-term ﬁnancial
slack. Conversely, someone who has some savings on hand but is spending as much
as they earn has short-term ﬁnancial slack, but not long-term ﬁnancial slack. Exercise
for the reader: what would short-term and long-term time and emotional slack look
like?
How do each of these create externalities for groups?

Space is an easy one: groups often need space in which to meet (either short-term,
when the usual space is unavailable, or long-term) or store things (again, either short-
term or long-term). If someone has spare space to use, that slack provides beneﬁts to
the whole group. But unless the group is paying to use the space, the person
providing the slack captures only a small share of the beneﬁts. So, people are
incentivized to maintain less space slack than optimal.
Financial is another easy one: if some group members can occasionally cover some
group costs, and it's not a big deal, that makes it a lot easier for a group to function
smoothly. Again, this applies both short-term (e.g. paying the bill for a group dinner,
with the expectation that everyone will eventually pay back) or long-term (covering
some costs without reimbursement). Again, the person providing slack captures only a
small share of the beneﬁts.
The short-term/long-term distinction matters mainly for a group's
agility/responsiveness/dynamicity. If there's a crisis and the group needs to respond
quickly, or the group needs to make and execute plans on-the-ﬂy as new information
comes in, that requires short-term slack on the part of the group members. For
instance, last year many groups started to work on COVID tools, like microcovid,
radvac, or the various forecasting projects. Many of these required full-time work -
people needed the slack to pause or quit their day jobs on relatively-short notice. That
takes short-term ﬁnancial slack, obviously, but also short-term  emotional slack (very
stressful!) and social slack (hopefully my coworkers aren't my only friends, or I can
make new ones quickly!).
Another example: suppose a company or organization wants to move (*cough*) - not
just across town, but to another state or country. That typically means employees will
need to move with them. That requires emotional slack: moves are among the most
stressful events most people go through. It requires social slack: people either need
friends in the new location, remote friends, or the ability to quickly make new friends.
And it requires ﬁnancial slack, to pay for the move.
In both these examples, the group needs slack from its members in order to do things.
(Or, to put it diﬀerently: group members' slack facilitates solutions to coordination
problems.) The ability to do things as a group mostly beneﬁts the whole group, so the
beneﬁts of any particular person's slack largely go to the rest of the group.
What To Do About It?
One standard econ-101 answer is "internalize the externalities" - i.e. reward people
for their slack. People don't usually do this with monetary payments, but we often do
it with less legible rewards, like social status. For instance, if someone provides space
for a group to meet, or occasionally covers some bills for the group, that's usually
rewarded with status within the group.
Another standard solution is to require group members to maintain slack. Again, this
usually isn't explicit, but we often do it in less-legible ways. For instance, if one or two
people have very little slack in their schedules, maybe the rest of the group decides to
meet without them. Or, if one or two people have very little emotional slack and
sometimes break down if a competition gets too stressful, maybe they end up usually
not participating in board game night or capture-the-ﬂag. This is especially relevant to
the last two examples from the previous section: the various COVID groups or the
organization moving. If someone lacks the slack to participate, they would probably

not end up in the group. Of course, there still need to be some people who do have
enough slack in order for the group to include anyone at all.
But these are illegible and imperfect methods. One point of this post is that it may
help to explicitly pay attention to slack and its externalities. At a personal level, if we
wish to be altruistic, this might mean maintaining extra slack in all its various forms,
in order to provide value to the groups in which we participate. It might also mean
avoiding people who have very little slack along one or more dimensions, or trying to
supplement others' slack when possible (easy for ﬁnances, hard for time). For group
organizers, it might mean explicitly requiring slack - e.g. the national guard requires
that its members be able to drop everything and respond full-time to an emergency.
Important side point: slack has increasing marginal returns; the tenth unit of any
particular ﬂavor of slack is worth more than the ﬁrst unit. The reason is that, if we ﬂip 
n coins and count up the number of heads, the noise in that count is only ~√n. And
more generally, if we add up ~n independent noisy things, the noise will typically be
of order ~√n. So, if we want to take advantage of noisy opportunities - like a project
which might go over budget, or a group which might need to move its meeting to a
diﬀerent time/space sometimes, or an event which might be fun or might be stressful
- then we only need ~√n units of slack to take advantage of ~n opportunities. Going
from zero unit of slack to one lets us take advantage of ~one more opportunity,
whereas going from nine units of slack to ten lets us take advantage of ~twenty more
opportunities. The more slack we have, the more we can beneﬁt from adding marginal
slack.
That means we should expect people to specialize in either having lots of slack, or no
slack at all. For instance, we should expect people to either have carefully-planned
tightly-packed calendars, or mostly-open calendars with lots of ﬂexibility. We should
expect people to either budget every dollar carefully, or have a large surplus and
mostly not worry about their budget. Etc. One type takes advantage of lots of "noisy"
opportunities, while the other makes their schedule/budget/etc maximally predictable.
For a low-slack person to take advantage of just one noisy opportunity would require
them to free up a bunch of extra room in their schedule/budget "just in case". The
high-slack person already has a bunch of "just in case" built in, and can "re-use" that
elbow room for one more thing, since it's highly unlikely that all the "risky" outcomes
will happen all at once.
To the extent that this actually holds in the real world, we can think of slack (of a
particular ﬂavor) as binary: am I a high-time-slack person or a low-time-slack person?
Am I a high-emotional-slack person or a low-emotional-slack person? That means the
incentives don't need to be perfect - as long as a group can roughly select for high-
slack members, or roughly reward high slack, that should be enough to incentivize the
high-slack equilibrium rather than the low-slack equilibrium, and create lots of positive
externalities for the group.

