
Sunzi's《Methods of War》
1. Sunzi's《Methods of War》- Introduction
2. Sunzi's《Methods of War》- War
3. Sunzi's《Methods of War》- Planning Attacks
4. Sunzi's《Methods of War》- The Army's Form
5. Sunzi's《Methods of War》- Potential

Sunzi's《Methods of War》-
Introduction
This is a translation of the Chapter 1 of The Art of War by Sunzi. No English sources
were used. The original text and many of the interpretations herein come from 古诗⽂
⽹.
孙⼦⽈：兵者，国之⼤事，死⽣之地，存亡之道，不可不察也。
War determines life and death of troops, existence and destruction of a country. It
cannot be ignored.
故经之以五事，校之以计，⽽索其情：⼀⽈道，⼆⽈天，三⽈地，四⽈将、五⽈法。
Five aspects are of paramount important:
1. Dao
2. Heaven
3. Earth
4. Generalship
5. Method
道者，令⺠与上同意也，故可以与之死，可以与之⽣，⽽不畏危。
"Dao" concerns alignment. Your side must be uniﬁed. By dying together, living
together, you shall be unafraid.
天者，阴阳，寒暑、时制也。
"Heaven" concerns timing, yin and yang, winter and summer.
地者，远近、险易、⼴狭、死⽣也。
"Earth" concerns the near and far, impassable and passable, open ﬁelds and choke
points, death and life.
将者，智、信、仁、勇、严也。
"Generalship" is a matter of wisdom, ﬁdelity, benevolence, bravery and severity.
法者，曲制、官道、主⽤也。
"Method" concerns tactics, doctrine and organization.
凡此五者，将莫不闻，知之者胜，不知者不胜。
A commander must not ignore these ﬁve aspects. Understanding them brings victory.
Lack of understanding does not bring victory.

故校之以计，⽽索其情，⽈：主孰有道？将孰有能？天地孰得？法令孰⾏？兵众孰强？⼠卒孰
练？赏罚孰明？
Ask yourself: Are ruler and subjects aligned? Is the general capable? Heaven (climate)
and Earth (geography) in your favor? Methods eﬀective? Troops strong? Trained?
Enlightenedly punished?
吾以此知胜负矣。将听吾计，⽤之必胜，留之；将不听吾计，⽤之必败，去之。计利以听，乃
为之势，以佐其外。势者，因利⽽制权也。
These things determine victory and defeat.
兵者，诡道也。故能⽽⽰之不能，⽤⽽⽰之不⽤，近⽽⽰之远，远⽽⽰之近；利⽽诱之，乱⽽
取之，实⽽备之，强⽽避之，怒⽽挠之，卑⽽骄之，佚⽽劳之，亲⽽离之。攻其⽆备，出其不
意。此兵家之胜，不可先传也。
The art of war depends on local conditions. The near informs you about the far. The far
informs you about the near.
If the enemy is clever then tempt.
If the enemy is disordered then raid.
If the enemy is capable then prepare.
If the enemy is mighty then run.
If the enemy is angry then provoke.
If the enemy is inferior then threaten.
If the enemy is dissolute then persevere.
Attack where the enemy is unprepared. Do what is least expected. But do not forget
the ﬁve aspects. They are of primary importance.
夫未战⽽庙算胜者，得算多也；未战⽽庙算不胜者，得算少也。多算胜，少算不胜，⽽况于⽆
算乎？吾以此观之，胜负⻅矣。
A war cannot be won without lots of equipment. This facet of war too must be
examined.

Sunzi's《Methods of War》- War
This is a translation of Chapter 2 of The Art of War by Sunzi. No English sources were
used.
孙⼦⽈：凡⽤兵之法，驰⻋千驷，⾰⻋千乘，带甲⼗万，千⾥馈粮，内外之费，宾客之⽤，㬵
漆之材，⻋甲之奉，⽇费千⾦，然后⼗万之师举矣。
The ordinary methods of war demand:
1,000 teams of 4 horses each,
1,000 wagons,
100,000 shields,
provisions to march 1,000 miles,
domestic and foreign expenses,
hospitality for guests,
construction materials for siege weapons,
armored vehicles,
salaries
...and an army of 100,000 soldiers.
其⽤战也胜，久则钝兵挫锐，攻城则⼒屈，久暴师则国⽤不⾜。
A long war is an expensive war.
夫钝兵挫锐，屈⼒殚货，则诸侯乘其弊⽽起，虽有智者，不能善其后矣。
An expensive war will cause your vassals to rebel against you.
故兵闻拙速，未睹巧之久也。夫兵久⽽国利者，未之有也。
There is no such thing as a beneﬁcial protracted war.
故不尽知⽤兵之害者，则不能尽知⽤兵之利也。
If you do not understand the costs of war then you do not know which wars are
worthwhile to ﬁght.
善⽤兵者，役不再籍，粮不三载，取⽤于国，因粮于敌，故军⾷可⾜也。
Do not conscript troops more than once. Do not resupply your army with grain more
than twice. Take what you need from the enemy. The enemy has ample grain and an
army of troops.
国之贫于师者远输，远输则百姓贫；
Resupplying an army over long distances impoverishes a country.
近师者贵卖，贵卖则百姓财竭，财竭则急于丘役。

Prices soar in wartime. Levying the peasantry under such circumstances will
impoverish them while extracting only forced labor.
⼒屈财殚，中原内虚于家，百姓之费，⼗去其七；
The central plains will go unfarmed. Seven tenths of the peasantry's labor will be
wasted.
公家之费，破军罢⻢，甲胄⽮弩，戟楯蔽橹，丘⽜⼤⻋，⼗去其六。
Supplying an army out of the public purse slows the army down. Horses sicken.
Shields split. Oxen tire. Six tenths is wasted.
故智将务⾷于敌，⾷敌⼀钟，当吾⼆⼗钟；萁秆⼀⽯，当吾⼆⼗⽯。
The wise general eats the enemy's food. A captured bowl of enemy food is worth
twenty bowls of your own. A captured ton of enemy grain is worth twenty tons of your
own.
故杀敌者，怒也；取敌之利者，货也。⻋战得⻋⼗乘以上，赏其先得者，⽽更其旌旗，⻋杂⽽
乘之，卒善⽽养之，是谓胜敌⽽益强。
Let your troops kill the enemy in anger, plunder the enemy in greed. A captured
enemy combat vehicle is worth no fewer than ten of your own. Reward your ﬁrst
soldier to capture one. Replace its ﬂag. Mix it in among your own.
A good soldier steals victory from the enemy.
故兵贵胜，不贵久。故知兵之将，⽣⺠之司命，国家安危之主也。
A valuable victory is a quick victory. A general who, understanding this, issues orders
to the people—thereupon is the fate of a state determined.

Sunzi's《Methods of War》- Planning
Attacks
This is a translation of Chapter 3 of The Art of War by Sunzi. No English sources were
used.
孙⼦⽈：夫⽤兵之法，
全国为上，破国次之，
全军为上，破军次之；
全旅为上，破旅次之；
全卒为上，破卒次之；
全伍为上，破伍次之。
It is best to conquer a state whole rather than breaking it.
It is best to conquer an army whole rather than breaking it.
It is best to conquer a regiment whole rather than breaking it.
It is better to conquer a company whole rather than breaking it.
It is better to conquer a squad whole rather than breaking it.
是故百战百胜，⾮善之善者也；
不战⽽屈⼈之兵，善之善者也。
A hundred victories in as many battles is imperfect perfection.
To defeat an enemy without a ﬁght is perfect perfection
故上兵伐谋，
其次伐交，
其次伐兵，
其下攻城。
The best use of soldiers is to dispatch plans,
followed by dispatching ambassadors,
followed by dispatching troops,
followed by attacking cities.
攻城之法为不得已。
Attack cities reluctantly.

修橹轒辒，具器械，三⽉⽽后成，距堙，⼜三⽉⽽后已。
Furbish your mortuary tools. In three months, dig a grave. Then dig another grave
three months after that.
将不胜其忿⽽蚁附之，杀⼠三分之⼀⽽城不拔者，此攻之灾也。
A general who grows impatient, angers and storms a city will kill one third of the
attacking force and fail to take the city.
故善⽤兵者，
屈⼈之兵⽽⾮战也，
拔⼈之城⽽⾮攻也，
毁⼈之国⽽⾮久也，
必以全争于天下。
The perfect general
subdues the enemy without battle,
draws enemies out of cities to be attacked,
destroys people quickly,
utilizes every attack under the sun.
故兵不顿⽽利可全，此谋攻之法也。
Total beneﬁt without halt, this is the strategem of war.
故⽤兵之法，
⼗则围之，
五则攻之，
倍则分之，
敌则能战之，
少则能逃之，
不若则能避之。
If you outnumber the enemy
10× surround
5× attack
2× divide
1× engage, if possible
<1× run, if possible

≪1× escape, if possible
故⼩敌之坚，
⼤敌之擒也。
A small stubborn force will be captured by a large enemy.
夫将者，国之辅也。
辅周，则国必强；
辅隙，则国必弱。
The general complements the country. If the complement is whole then the country
will be mighty. If the complement is chinked then the country will be weak.
故君之所以患于军者三：
There are three obstructions to commanding armies:
不知军之不可以进⽽谓之进，不知军之不可以退⽽谓之退，是谓"縻军"；
If you do not know the army cannot advance then the army will not advance at your
command. If you do not know the army cannot retreat then the army cannot retreat at
your command. This is called a "tied up" army.
不知三军之事，⽽同三军之政者，则军⼠惑矣；
If you do not know the three armies[1] and their command structure then soldiers will
be confused.
不知三军之权，⽽同三军之任，则军⼠疑矣。
If you contradict the commands already issued by oﬃcers then they will be hesitant.
三军既惑且疑，则诸侯之难⾄矣，是谓"乱军引胜"。
If your army is confused and hesitant then your feudal lords will rebel against you.
This is called a "self-defeating army".
故知胜有五：知可以战与不可以战者胜，识众寡之⽤者胜，上下同欲者胜，以虞待不虞者胜，
将能⽽君不御者胜。此五者，知胜之道也。
There are ﬁve things you must know in advance to ensure victory:
If you understand the conditions you can ﬁght or cannot ﬁght, then you are
capable of victory.
If you understand how to ﬂexibly employ the many and the few, then you are
capable of victory.
If the whole army is of one heart, then you are capable of victory.
If, prepared, you attack an unprepared enemy, then you are capable of victory.
If the regent does not meddle with the general, then you are capable of victory.

These ﬁve conditions, know the Dao of victory.
故⽈：知彼知⼰者，百战不殆；
Know the other, know yourself, one hundred battles, zero defeats.
不知彼⽽知⼰，⼀胜⼀负，
Know not the other or know not yourself, one victory, one defeat.
不知彼，不知⼰，每战必殆。
Know not the other, know not yourself, every battle, requisite defeat.
Translation Note
"知彼" is often translated "know your enemy". The word for enemy is "敌". Sunzi uses it
frequently. If Sunzi wanted to say "know [your] enemy" then he would write "知敌".
Instead he writes "知彼". The pronoun "彼" means "that which is not you".
1. The phrase "three armies" 三军 used to refer to the upper, middle and lower
army. Today, the phrase refers to the Army, Navy and Air Force. ↩ 

Sunzi's《Methods of War》- The
Army's Form
This is a translation of Chapter 4 of The Art of War by Sunzi. No English sources were
used.
孙⼦⽈：昔之善战者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜。
Do not ﬁrst seek victory. Establish conditions such that you cannot lose.
不可胜在⼰，可胜在敌。
Then await an opportunity to win.
故善战者，能为不可胜，不使敌之必可胜。
You can, with skill, survive, but only the enemy can permit your victory.
故⽈：胜可知，⽽不可为。
Victory can be foreseen, but cannot be forced.
不可胜者，守也；可胜者，攻也。
If you cannot win, defend. If you can win, attack.
守则不⾜，攻则有余。
Defend when your forces are insuﬃcient. Attack when your forces are ample.
善守者，藏于九地之下，善攻者，动于九天之上，故能⾃保⽽全胜也。
The capable defender hides under the nine earths. The capable attacker strikes from
the nine heavens. Protect yourself and obtain total victory.
⻅胜不过众⼈之所知，⾮善之善者也；战胜⽽天下⽈善，⾮善之善者也。
Forseeing victory when the masses cannot is an imperfect perfection. Obtaining
victory by moving everything under heaven is an imperfect perfection.
故举秋毫不为多⼒，⻅⽇⽉不为明⽬，闻雷霆不为聪⽿。
It is like like lifting up the vellus hair of autumn's newborn fauna. Noticing the sun and
moon does not indicate a keen eye. Hearing thunder does not indicate a keen ear.
古之所谓善战者，胜于易胜者也。故善战者之胜也，⽆智名，⽆勇功。
The great generals of history defeated weak enemies. They employed neither
cleverness nor courage.

故其战胜不忒，不忒者，其所措必胜，胜已败者也。
They did not win by a hair. Victory was assured.
故善战者，⽴于不败之地，⽽不失敌之败也。
Firmly established, all they did was not lose.
是故胜兵先胜⽽后求战，败兵先战⽽后求胜。
Victorious armies ﬁrst seek victory and then ﬁght. Defeated armies ﬁrst ﬁght and then
seek to win.
善⽤兵者，修道⽽保法，故能为胜败之政。
Good commanders maintain proper military governance in order to govern the
outcome of war.
兵法：⼀⽈度，⼆⽈量，三⽈数，四⽈称，五⽈胜。地⽣度，度⽣量，量⽣数，数⽣称，称⽣
胜。
You must pay attention to:
1. the territory
2. the quantities
3. the numbers
4. the names
5. victory
The territory determines the quantities. The quantities determines the numbers. The
numbers determine the names. The names determine victory.
故胜兵若以镒称铢，败兵若以铢称镒。
The victorious soldier weighs a kilo and is called a gram; the defeated soldier weighs a
gram and is called a kilo.
胜者之战⺠也，若决积⽔于千仞之溪者，形也。
The good general embodies the form an unstoppable river with a thousand tributaries.

Sunzi's《Methods of War》- Potential
This is a translation of Chapter 5 of The Art of War by Sunzi. No English sources were
used.
孙⼦⽈：凡治众如治寡，分数是也；⽃众如⽃寡，形名是也；三军之众，可使必受敌⽽⽆败
者，奇正是也；兵之所加，如以碫投卵者，虚实是也。
To command the many as if commanding the few; to combat the many as if
combating the few; the three armies can receive enemy attacks without being
defeated, can attack like a stone thrown at an egg.
凡战者，以正合，以奇胜。故善出奇者，⽆穷如天地，不竭如江海。终⽽复始，⽇⽉是也。死
⽽更⽣，四时是也。声不过五，五声之变，不可胜听也；⾊不过五，五⾊之变，不可胜观也；
味不过五，五味之变，不可胜尝也；战势不过奇正，奇正之变，不可胜穷也。奇正相⽣，如循
环之⽆端，孰能穷之哉！
Conventional combat achieves typical results. Invent surprises to achieve victory. Elite
soldiers have the creativity of Heaven and Earth, the tirelessness of a river ﬂowing
into the sea. They ﬁnish and start again like the sun and the moon. They die and are
reborn like the four seasons.
From the arrangements of ﬁve[1] musical notes can be heard inﬁnite sounds. From the
arrangements of ﬁve colors can be seen inﬁnite colors. From the arrangements of ﬁve
ﬂavors can be tasted inﬁnite ﬂavors.
The use of military power is limited to invention and convention. From convention and
invention can be arranged inﬁnite strategies.
激⽔之疾，⾄于漂⽯者，势也；鸷⻦之疾，⾄于毁折者，节也。故善战者，其势险，其节短。
势如彍弩，节如发机。
Turbulent water can move a boulder in one swift impulse. A raptor can kill its prey in
one swift swoop. The skilled at war create precarious tension and abrupt release like
the rhythm of the bolt(s) fed through a repeating crossbow.
纷纷纭纭，⽃乱⽽不可乱；浑浑沌沌，形圆⽽不可败。乱⽣于治，怯⽣于勇，弱⽣于强。治
乱，数也；勇怯，势也；强弱，形也。
Though the battleﬁeld is chaotic, your command structure must be in order.
Numbers: one side is in chaos = the other side is ordered
Potential: one side is cowardly = the other side is brave
Form: one side is weak = the other side is strong
故善动敌者，形之，敌必从之；予之，敌必取之。以利动之，以卒待之。
Those skilled at war move the enemy via the situation, the enemy follows the
situation; provide bait, the enemy will seize it. Do not let your own troops be so

moved.
故善战者，求之于势，不责于⼈故能择⼈⽽任势。任势者，其战⼈也，如转⽊⽯。⽊⽯之性，
安则静，危则动，⽅则⽌，圆则⾏。
Those skilled at war seek out potential by placing the right talent in the right
circumstances like placing wood and stone. Wood and stone stand still on ﬂat terrain,
rolls down steep terrain. A square is easy to stand still. A round shape is easy to roll.
故善战⼈之势，如转圆⽯于千仞之⼭者，势也。
To command troops as if rolling a round stone down a 10,000-foot mountain. This is
called "potential".
1. "Five musical notes" refers to the pentatonic scale. ↩ 

