
Three Worlds Collide
1. The Baby-Eating Aliens (1/8)
2. War and/or Peace (2/8)
3. The Super Happy People (3/8)
4. Interlude with the Confessor (4/8)
5. Three Worlds Decide (5/8)
6. Normal Ending: Last Tears (6/8)
7. True Ending: Sacriﬁcial Fire (7/8)
8. Epilogue: Atonement (8/8)

The Baby-Eating Aliens (1/8)
(Part 1 of 8 in "Three Worlds Collide")
This is a story of an impossible outcome, where AI never worked, molecular
nanotechnology never worked, biotechnology only sort-of worked; and yet somehow
humanity not only survived, but discovered a way to travel Faster-Than-Light:  The
past's Future.
Ships travel through the Alderson starlines, wormholes that appear near stars.  The
starline network is dense and unpredictable: more than a billion starlines lead away
from Sol, but every world explored is so far away as to be outside the range of Earth's
telescopes.  Most colony worlds are located only a single jump away from Earth, which
remains the center of the human universe.
From the colony system Huygens, the crew of the Giant Science Vessel Impossible
Possible World have set out to investigate a starline that ﬂared up with an
unprecedented ﬂux of Alderson force before subsiding.  Arriving, the Impossible
discovers the sparkling debris of a recent nova - and -
"ALIENS!"
Every head swung toward the Sensory console.  But after that one cryptic outburst,
the Lady Sensory didn't even look up from her console: her ﬁngers were frantically
twitching commands.
There was a strange moment of silence in the Command Conference while every
listener thought the same two thoughts in rapid succession:
Is she nuts?  You can't just say "Aliens!", leave it at that, and expect everyone to
believe you.  Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence -
And then,
They came to look at the nova too!
In a situation like this, it befalls the Conference Chair to speak ﬁrst.
"What?  SHIT!" shouted Akon, who didn't realize until later that his words would be
inscribed for all time in the annals of history.  Akon swung around and looked
frantically at the main display of the Command Conference.  "Where are they?"
The Lady Sensory looked up from her console, ﬁngers still twitching.  "I - I don't know,
I just picked up an incoming high-frequency signal - they're sending us enormous
amounts of data, petabytes, I had to clear long-term memory and set up an automatic
pipe or risk losing the whole -"
"Found them!" shouted the Lord Programmer.  "I searched through our Greater Archive
and turned up a program to look for anomalous energy sources near local starlines. 
It's from way back from the ﬁrst days of exploration, but I managed to ﬁnd an
emulation program for -"
"Just show it!"  Akon took a deep breath, trying to calm himself.

The main display swiftly scanned across ﬁery space and settled on... a set of windows
into ﬁre, the ﬁre of space shattered by the nova, but then shattered again into
triangular shards.
It took Akon a moment to realize that he was looking at an icosahedron of perfect
mirrors.
Huh, thought Akon, they're lower-tech than us.  Their own ship, the Impossible, was
absorbing the vast quantities of local radiation and dumping it into their Alderson
reactor; the mirror-shielding seemed a distinctly inferior solution.  Unless that's what
they want us to think...
"Deﬂectors!" shouted the Lord Pilot suddenly.  "Should I put up deﬂectors?"
"Deﬂectors?" said Akon, startled.
The Pilot spoke very rapidly.  "Sir, we use a self-sustaining Alderson reaction to power
our starline jumps and our absorbing shields.  That same reaction could be used to
emit a directed beam that would snuﬀ a similar reaction - the aliens are putting out
their own Alderson emissions, they could snuﬀ our absorbers at any time, and the
nova ashes would roast us instantly - unless I conﬁgure a deﬂector -"
The Ship's Confessor spoke, then.  "Have the aliens put up deﬂectors of their own?"
Akon's mind seemed to be moving very slowly, and yet the essential thoughts felt,
somehow, obvious.  "Pilot, set up the deﬂector program but don't activate it until I
give the word.  Sensory, drop everything else and tell me whether the aliens have put
up their own deﬂectors."
Sensory looked up.  Her ﬁngers twitched only brieﬂy through a few short commands. 
Then, "No," she said.
"Then I think," Akon said, though his spine felt frozen solid, "that we should not be the
ﬁrst to put this interaction on a... combative footing.  The aliens have made a gesture
of goodwill by leaving themselves vulnerable.  We must reciprocate."  Surely, no
species would advance far enough to colonize space without understanding the logic
of the Prisoner's Dilemma...
"You assume too much," said the Ship's Confessor.  "They are aliens."
"Not much goodwill," said the Pilot.  His ﬁngers were twitching, not commands, but
almost-commands, subvocal thoughts.  "The aliens' Alderson reaction is weaker than
ours by an order of magnitude.  We could break any shield they could put up.  Unless
they struck ﬁrst.  If they leave their deﬂectors down, they lose nothing, but they invite
us to leave our own down -"
"If they were going to strike ﬁrst," Akon said, "they could have struck before we even
knew they were here.  But instead they spoke."  Surely, oh surely, they understand the
Prisoner's Dilemma.
"Maybe they hope to gain information and then kill us," said the Pilot.  "We have
technology they want.  That enormous message - the only way we could send them an
equivalent amount of data would be by dumping our entire Local Archive.  They may
be hoping that we feel the emotional need to, as you put it, reciprocate -"

"Hold on," said the Lord Programmer suddenly.  "I may have managed to translate
their language."
You could have heard a pin dropping from ten lightyears away.
The Lord Programmer smiled, ever so slightly.  "You see, that enormous dump of data
they sent us - I think that was their Local Archive, or equivalent.  A sizable part of their
Net, anyway.  Their text, image, and holo formats are utterly straightforward - either
they don't bother compressing anything, or they decompressed it all for us before
they sent it.  And here's the thing: back in the Dawn era, when there were multiple
human languages, there was this notion that people had of statistical language
translation.  Now, the classic method used a known corpus of human-translated text. 
But there were successor methods that tried to extend the translation further, by
generating semantic skeletons and trying to map the skeletons themselves onto one
another.  And there are also ways of automatically looking for similarity between
images or holos.  Believe it or not, there was a program already in the Archive for
trying to ﬁnd points of linkage between an alien corpus and a human corpus, and then
working out from there to map semantic skeletons... and it runs quickly, since it's
designed to work on older computer systems.  So I ran the program, it ﬁnished, and
it's claiming that it can translate the alien language with 70% conﬁdence.  Could be a
total bug, of course.  But the aliens sent a second message that followed their main
data dump - short, looks like text-only.  Should I run the translator on that, and put the
results on the main display?"
Akon stared at the Lord Programmer, absorbing this, and ﬁnally said, "Yes."
"All right," said the Lord Programmer, "here goes machine learning," and his ﬁngers
twitched once.
Over the icosahedron of fractured ﬁre, translucent letters appeared:
THIS VESSEL IS THE OPTIMISM OF THE CENTER OF THE VESSEL PERSON
YOU HAVE NOT KICKED US
THEREFORE YOU EAT BABIES
WHAT IS OURS IS YOURS, WHAT IS YOURS IS OURS
"Stop that laughing," Akon said absentmindedly, "it's distracting."  The Conference
Chair pinched the bridge of his nose.  "All right.  That doesn't seem completely
random.  The ﬁrst line... is them identifying their ship, maybe.  Then the second line
says that we haven't opened ﬁre on them, or that they won't open ﬁre on us -
something like that.  The third line, I have absolutely no idea.  The fourth... is oﬀering
some kind of reciprocal trade -"  Akon stopped then.  So did the laughter.
"Would you like to send a return message?" said the Lord Programmer.
Everyone looked at him.  Then everyone looked at Akon.
Akon thought about that very carefully.  Total silence for a lengthy period of time
might not be construed as friendly by a race that had just talked at them for
petabytes.

"All right," Akon said.  He cleared his throat.  "We are still trying to understand your
language.  We do not understand well.  We are trying to translate.  We may not
translate correctly.  These words may not say what we want them to say.  Please do
not be oﬀended.  This is the research vessel named quote Impossible Possible World
unquote.  We are pleased to meet you.  We will assemble data for transmission to you,
but do not have it ready."  Akon paused.  "Send them that.  If you can make your
program translate it three diﬀerent plausible ways, do that too - it may make it clearer
that we're working from an automatic program."
The Lord Programmer twitched a few more times, then spoke to the Lady Sensory. 
"Ready."
"Are you really sure this is a good idea?" said Sensory doubtfully.
Akon sighed.  "No.  Send the message."
For twenty seconds after, there was silence.  Then new words appeared on the
display:
WE ARE GLAD TO SEE YOU CANNOT BE DONE
YOU SPEAK LIKE BABY CRUNCH CRUNCH
WITH BIG ANGELIC POWERS
WE WISH TO SUBSCRIBE TO YOUR NEWSLETTER
"All right," Akon said, after a while.  It seemed, on the whole, a positive response.  "I
expect a lot of people are eager to look at the alien corpus.  But I also need volunteers
to hunt for texts and holo ﬁles in our own Archive.  Which don't betray the engineering
principles behind any technology we've had for less than, say," Akon thought about
the mirror shielding and what it implied, "a hundred years.  Just showing that it can be
done... we won't try to avoid that, but don't give away the science..."
A day later, the atmosphere at the Command Conference was considerably more
tense.
Bewilderment.  Horror.  Fear.  Numbness.  Refusal.  And in the distant background,
slowly simmering, a dangerous edge of rising righteous fury.
"First of all," Akon said.  "First of all.  Does anyone have any plausible hypothesis, any
reasonable interpretation of what we know, under which the aliens do not eat their
own children?"
"There is always the possibility of misunderstanding," said the former Lady
Psychologist, who was now, suddenly and abruptly, the lead Xenopsychologist of the
ship, and therefore of humankind.  "But unless the entire corpus they sent us is a
ﬁction... no."
The alien holos showed tall crystalline insectile creatures, all ﬂat planes and
intersecting angles and prismatic refractions, propelling themselves over a ﬁeld of
sharp rocks: the aliens moved like hopping on pogo sticks, bouncing oﬀ the ground
using projecting limbs that sank into their bodies and then rebounded.  There was a

cold beauty to the aliens' crystal bodies and their twisting rotating motions, like
screensavers taking on sentient form.
And the aliens bounded over the sharp rocks toward tiny ﬂeeing ﬁgures like delicate
spherical snowﬂakes, and grabbed them with pincers, and put them in their mouths. 
It was a central theme in holo after holo.
The alien brain was much smaller and denser than a human's.  The alien children,
though their bodies were tiny, had full-sized brains.  They could talk.  They protested
as they were eaten, in the ﬂickering internal lights that the aliens used to
communicate.  They screamed as they vanished into the adult aliens' maws.
Babies, then, had been a mistranslation:   Preteens would have been more accurate.
Still, everyone was calling the aliens Babyeaters.
The children were sentient at the age they were consumed.  The text portions of the
corpus were very clear about that.  It was part of the great, the noble, the most holy
sacriﬁce.  And the children were loved: this was part of the central truth of life, that
parents could overcome their love and engage in the terrible winnowing.  A parent
might spawn a hundred children, and only one in a hundred could survive - for
otherwise they would die later, of starvation...
When the Babyeaters had come into their power as a technological species, they
could have chosen to modify themselves - to prevent all births but one.
But this they did not choose to do.
For that terrible winnowing was the central truth of life, after all.
The one now called Xenopsychologist had arrived to the Huygens system with the ﬁrst
colonization vessel.  Since then she had spent over one hundred years practicing the
profession of psychology, earning the rare title of Lady.  (Most people got fed up and
switched careers after no more than ﬁfty, whatever their ﬁrst intentions.)  Now, after
all that time, she was simply the Xenopsychologist, no longer a Lady of her
profession.  Being the ﬁrst and only Xenopsychologist made no diﬀerence; the
hundred-year rule for true expertise was not a rule that anyone could suspend.  If she
was the foremost Xenopsychologist of humankind, then also she was the least, the
most foolish and the most ignorant.  She was only an apprentice Xenopsychologist, no
matter that there were no masters anywhere.  In theory, her social status should have
been too low to be seated at the Conference Table.  In theory.
The Xenopsychologist was two hundred and ﬁfty years old.  She looked much older,
now, as as she spoke.  "In terms of evolutionary psychology... I think I understand
what happened.  The ancestors of the Babyeaters were a species that gave birth to
hundreds of oﬀspring in a spawning season, like Terrestrial ﬁsh; what we call r-
strategy reproduction.  But the ancestral Babyeaters discovered... crystal-tending, a
kind of agriculture... long before humans did.  They were around as smart as
chimpanzees, when they started farming.  The adults federated into tribes so they
could guard territories and tend crystal.  They adapted to pen up their oﬀspring, to
keep them around in herds so they could feed them.  But they couldn't produce
enough crystal for all the children.
"It's a truism in evolutionary biology that group selection can't work among non-
relatives.  The exception is if there are enforcement mechanisms, punishment for

defectors - then there's no individual advantage to cheating, because you get slapped
down.  That's what happened with the Babyeaters.  They didn't restrain their
individual reproduction because the more children they put in the tribal pen, the more
children of theirs were likely to survive.  But the total production of oﬀspring from the
tribal pen was greater, if the children were winnowed down, and the survivors got
more individual resources and attention afterward.  That was how their species began
to shift toward a k-strategy, an individual survival strategy.  That was the beginning of
their culture.
"And anyone who tried to cheat, to hide away a child, or even go easier on their own
children during the winnowing - well, the Babyeaters treated the merciful parents the
same way that human tribes treat their traitors.
"They developed psychological adaptations for enforcing that, their ﬁrst great group
norm.  And those psychological adaptations, those emotions, were reused over the
course of their evolution, as the Babyeaters began to adapt to their more complex
societies.  Honor, friendship, the good of our tribe - the Babyeaters acquired many of
the same moral adaptations as humans, but their brains reused the emotional
circuitry of infanticide to do it.
"The Babyeater word for good means, literally, to eat children."
The Xenopsychologist paused there, taking a sip of water.  Pale faces looked back at
her from around the table.
The Lady Sensory spoke up.  "I don't suppose... we could convince them they were
wrong about that?"
The Ship's Confessor was robed and hooded in silver, indicating that he was there
formally as a guardian of sanity.  His voice was gentle, though, as he spoke:  "I don't
believe that's how it works."
"Even if you could persuade them, it might not be a good idea," said the
Xenopsychologist.  "If you convinced the Babyeaters to see it our way - that they had
committed a wrong of that magnitude - there isn't anything in the universe that could
stop them from hunting down and exterminating themselves.  They don't have a
concept of forgiveness; their only notion of why someone might go easy on a
transgressor, is to spare an ally, or use them as a puppet, or being too lazy or
cowardly to carry out the vengeance.  The word for wrong is the same symbol as
mercy, you see."  The Xenopsychologist shook her head.  "Punishment of non-
punishers is very much a way of life, with them.  A Manichaean, dualistic view of
reality.  They may have literally believed that we ate babies, at ﬁrst, just because we
didn't open ﬁre on them."
Akon frowned.  "Do you really think so?  Wouldn't that make them... well, a bit
unimaginative?"
The Ship's Master of Fandom was there; he spoke up.  "I've been trying to read
Babyeater literature," he said.  "It's not easy, what with all the translation diﬃculties,"
and he sent a frown at the Lord Programmer, who returned it.  "In one sense, we're
lucky enough that the Babyeaters have a concept of ﬁction, let alone science ﬁction -"
"Lucky?" said the Lord Pilot.  "You've got to have an imagination to make it to the
stars.  The sort of species that wouldn't invent science ﬁction, probably wouldn't even
invent the wheel -"

"But," interrupted the Master, "just as most of their science ﬁction deals with
crystalline entities - the closest they come to postulating human anatomy, in any of
the stories I've read, was a sort of giant sentient ﬂoppy sponge - so too, nearly all of
the aliens their explorers meet, eat their own children.  I doubt the authors spent
much time questioning the assumption; they didn't want anything so alien that their
readers couldn't empathize.  The purpose of storytelling is to stimulate the moral
instincts, which is why all stories are fundamentally about personal sacriﬁce and loss -
that's their theory of literature.  Though you can ﬁnd stories where the wise,
benevolent elder aliens explain how the need to control tribal population is the great
selective transition, and how no species can possibly evolve sentience and
cooperation without eating babies, and even if they did, they would war among
themselves and destroy themselves."
"Hm," said the Xenopsychologist.  "The Babyeaters might not be too far wrong - stop
staring at me like that, I don't mean it that way.  I'm just saying, the Babyeater
civilization didn't have all that many wars.  In fact, they didn't have any wars at all
after they ﬁnished adopting the scientiﬁc method.  It was the great watershed
moment in their history - the notion of a reasonable mistake, that you didn't have to
kill all the adherents of a mistaken hypothesis.  Not because you were forgiving them,
but because they'd made the mistake by reasoning on insuﬃcient data, rather than
any inherent ﬂaw.  Up until then, all wars were wars of total extermination - but
afterward, the theory was that if a large group of people could all do something
wrong, it was probably a reasonable mistake.  Their conceptualization of probability
theory - of a formally correct way of manipulating uncertainty - was followed by the
dawn of their world peace."
"But then -" said the Lady Sensory.
"Of course," added the Xenopsychologist, "anyone who departs from the group norm
due to an actual inherent ﬂaw still has to be destroyed.  And not everyone agreed at
ﬁrst that the scientiﬁc method was moral - it does seem to have been highly
counterintuitive to them - so their last war was the one where the science-users killed
oﬀ all the nonscientists.  After that, it was world peace."
"Oh," said the Lady Sensory softly.
"Yes," the Xenopsychologist said, "after that, all the Babyeaters banded together as a
single super-group that only needed to execute individual heretics.  They now have a
strong cultural taboo against wars between tribes."
"Unfortunately," said the Master of Fandom, "that taboo doesn't let us oﬀ the hook. 
You can also ﬁnd science ﬁction stories - though they're much rarer - where the
Babyeaters and the aliens don't immediately join together into a greater society. 
Stories of horrible monsters who don't eat their children.  Monsters who multiply like
bacteria, war among themselves like rats, hate all art and beauty, and destroy
everything in their pathway.  Monsters who have to be exterminated down to the last
strand of their DNA - er, last nucleating crystal."
Akon spoke, then.  "I accept full responsibility," said the Conference Chair, "for the
decision to send the Babyeaters the texts and holos we did.  But the fact remains that
they have more than enough information about us to infer that we don't eat our
children.  They may be able to guess how we would see them.  And they haven't sent
anything to us, since we began transmitting to them."
"So the question then is - now what?"

To be continued...

War and/or Peace (2/8)
(Part 2 of 8 in "Three Worlds Collide")
..."So the question then is - now what?"
The Lord Pilot jumped up, then, his face ﬂushed.  "Put up shields.  Now.  We don't gain
anything by leaving them down.  This is madness!"
"No," said the Ship's Confessor in professional tones, "not madness."
The Pilot slammed his ﬁsts on the table.  "We're all going to die!"
"They're not as technologically advanced as us," Akon said.  "Suppose the Babyeaters
do decide that we need to be exterminated.  Suppose they open ﬁre.  Suppose they
kill us.  Suppose they follow the starline we opened and ﬁnd the Huygens system. 
Then what?"
The Master nodded.  "Even with surprise on their side... no.  They can't actually wipe
out the human species.  Not unless they're a lot smarter than they seem to be, and it
looks to me like, on average, they're actually a bit dumber than us."  The Master
glanced at the Xenopsychologist, who waved her hand in a maybe-gesture.
"But if we leave the ship's shields down," Akon said, "we preserve whatever chance
we have of a peaceful resolution to this."
"Peace," said the Lady Sensory, in a peculiar ﬂat tone.
Akon looked at her.
"You want peace with the Babyeaters?"
"Of course -" said Akon, then stopped short.
The Lady Sensory looked around the table.  "And the Babyeater children?  What about
them?"
The Master of Fandom spoke, his voice uncertain.  "You can't impose human standards
on -"
With a blur of motion and a sharp crack, the Lady Sensory slapped him.
The Ship's Confessor grabbed her arm.  "No."
The Lady Sensory stared at the Ship's Confessor.
"No," the Confessor repeated.  "No violence.  Only argument.  Violence doesn't
distinguish truth from falsehood, my Lady."
The Lady Sensory slowly lowered her hand, but not her eyes.
"But..." said the Master.  "But, my Lady, if they want to be eaten -"
"They don't," said the Xenopsychologist.  "Of course they don't.  They run from their
parents when the terrible winnowing comes.  The Babyeater children aren't

emotionally mature - I mean they don't have their adult emotional state yet. 
Evolution would take care of anyone who wanted to get eaten.  And they're still
learning, still making mistakes, so they don't yet have the instinct to exterminate
violators of the group code.  It's a simpler time for them.  They play, they explore,
they try out new ideas.  They're..." and the Xenopsychologist stopped.  "Damn," she
said, and turned her head away from the table, covering her face with her hands. 
"Excuse me."  Her voice was unsteady.  "They're a lot like human children, really."
"And if they were human children," said the Lady Sensory into the silence, "do you
think that, just because the Babyeater species wanted to eat human children, that
would make it right for them to do it?"
"No," said the Lord Pilot.
"Then what diﬀerence does it make?" said the Lady Sensory.
"No diﬀerence at all," said the Lord Pilot.
Akon looked back and forth between the two of them, and saw what was coming, and
somehow couldn't speak.
"We have to save them," said the Lady Sensory.  "We have to stop this.  No matter
what it takes.  We can't let this go on."
Couldn't say that one word -
The Lord Pilot nodded.  "Destroy their ship.  Preserve our advantage of surprise.  Go
back, tell the world, create an overwhelming human army... and pour into the
Babyeater starline network.  And rescue the children."
"No," Akon said.
No?
"I know," said the Lord Pilot.  "A lot of Babyeaters will die at ﬁrst, but they're killing ten
times more children than their whole adult population, every year -"
"And then what?" said the Master of Fandom.  "What happens when the children grow
up?"
The Lord Pilot fell silent.
The Master of Fandom completed the question.  "Are you going to wipe out their whole
race, because their existence is too horrible to be allowed to go on?  I read their
stories, and I didn't understand them, but -"  The Master of Fandom swallowed. 
"They're not... evil.  Don't you understand?  They're not.  Are you going to punish me,
because I don't want to punish them?"
"We could..." said the Lord Pilot.  "Um.  We could modify their genes so that they only
gave birth to a single child at a time."
"No," said the Xenopsychologist.  "They would grow up loathing themselves for being
unable to eat babies.  Horrors in their own eyes.  It would be kinder just to kill them."
"Stop," said Akon.  His voice wasn't strong, wasn't loud, but everyone in the room
looked at him.  "Stop.  We are not going to ﬁre on their ship."

"Why not?" said the Lord Pilot.  "They -"
"They haven't raised shields," said Akon.
"Because they know it won't make a diﬀerence!" shouted the Pilot.
"They didn't ﬁre on us!" shouted Akon.  Then he stopped, lowered his voice.  "They
didn't ﬁre on us.  Even after they knew that we didn't eat babies.  I am not going to
ﬁre on them.  I refuse to do it."
"You think they're innocent?" demanded the Lady Sensory.  "What if it was human
children that were being eaten?"
Akon stared out a viewscreen, showing in subdued ﬁres a computer-generated graphic
of the nova debris.  He just felt exhausted, now.  "I never understood the Prisoner's
Dilemma until this day.  Do you cooperate when you really do want the highest
payoﬀ?  When it doesn't even seem fair for both of you to cooperate?  When it seems
right to defect even if the other player doesn't?  That's the payoﬀ matrix of the true
Prisoner's Dilemma.  But all the rest of the logic - everything about what happens if
you both think that way, and both defect - is the same.  Do we want to live in a
universe of cooperation or defection?"
"But -" said the Lord Pilot.
"They know," Akon said, "that they can't wipe us out.  And they can guess what we
could do to them.  Their choice isn't to ﬁre on us and try to invade afterward!  Their
choice is to ﬁre on us and run from this star system, hoping that no other ships follow. 
It's their whole species at stake, against just this one ship.  And they still haven't
ﬁred."
"They won't ﬁre on us," said the Xenopsychologist, "until they decide that we've
defected from the norm.  It would go against their sense of... honor, I could call it, but
it's much stronger than the human version -"
"No," Akon said.  "Not that much stronger."  He looked around, in the silence.  "The
Babyeater society has been at peace for centuries.  So too with human society.  Do
you want to ﬁre the opening shot that brings war back into the universe?  Send us
back to the darkness-before-dawn that we only know from reading history books,
because the holos are too horrible to watch?  Are you really going to press the button,
knowing that?"
The Lord Pilot took a deep breath.  "I will.  You will not remain commander of the
Impossible, my lord, if the greater conference votes no conﬁdence against you.  And
they will, my lord, for the sake of the children."
"What," said the Master, "are you going to do with the children?"
"We, um, have to do something," said the Ship's Engineer, speaking up for the ﬁrst
time.  "I've been, um, looking into what Babyeater science knows about their brain
mechanisms.  It's really quite fascinating, they mix electrical and mechanical
interactions, not the same way our own brain pumps ions, but -"
"Get to the point," said Akon.  "Immediately."

"The children don't die right away," said the Engineer.  "The brain is this nugget of
hard crystal, that's really resistant to, um, the digestive mechanisms, much more so
than the rest of the body.  So the child's brain is in, um, probably quite a lot of pain,
since the whole body has been amputated, and in a state of sensory deprivation, and
then the processing slowly gets degraded, and I think the whole process gets
completed about a month after -"
The Lady Sensory threw up.  A few seconds later, so did the Xenopsychologist and the
Master.
"If human society permits this to go on," said the Lord Pilot, his voice very soft, "I will
resign from human society, and I will have friends, and we will visit the Babyeater
starline network with an army.  You'll have to kill me to stop me."
"And me," said the Lady Sensory through tears.
Akon rose from his chair, and leaned forward; a dominating move that he had learned
in classrooms, very long ago when he was ﬁrst studying to be an Administrator.  But
most in humanity's promotion-conscious society would not risk direct deﬁance of an
Administrator.  In a hundred years he'd never had his authority really tested, until
now...  "I will not permit you to ﬁre on the alien ship.  Humanity will not be ﬁrst to
defect in the Prisoner's Dilemma."
The Lord Pilot stood up, and Akon realized, with a sudden jolt, that the Pilot was four
inches taller; the thought had never occurred to him before.  The Pilot didn't lean
forward, not knowing the trick, or not caring.  The Pilot's eyes were narrow,
surrounding facial muscles tensed and tight.
"Get out of my way," said the Lord Pilot.
Akon opened his mouth, but no words came out.
"It is time," said the Lord Pilot, "to see this calamity to its end."  Spoken in Archaic
English: the words uttered by Thomas Clarkson in 1785, at the beginning of the end of
slavery.  "I have set my will against this disaster; I will break it, or it will break me."  Ira
Howard in 2014.  "I will not share my universe with this shadow," and that was the
Lord Pilot, in an anger hotter than the nova's ashes.  "Help me if you will, or step aside
if you lack decisiveness; but do not make yourself my obstacle, or I will burn you
down, and any that stand with you -"
"HOLD."
Every head in the room jerked toward the source of the voice.  Akon had been an
Administrator for a hundred years, and a Lord Administrator for twenty.  He had
studied all the classic texts, and watched holos of famous crisis situations; nearly all
the accumulated knowledge of the Administrative Field was at his beck and call; and
he'd never dreamed that a word could be spoken with such absolute force.
The Ship's Confessor lowered his voice.  "My Lord Pilot.  I will not permit you to declare
your crusade, when you have not said what you are crusading for.  It is not enough to
say that you do not like the way things are.  You must say how you will change them,
and to what.  You must think all the way to your end.  Will you wipe out the Babyeater
race entirely?  Keep their remnants under human rule forever, in despair under our
law?  You have not even faced your hard choices, only congratulated yourself on
demanding that something be done.  I judge that a violation of sanity, my lord."

The Lord Pilot stood rigid.  "What -" his voice broke.  "What do you suggest we do?"
"Sit down," said the Ship's Confessor, "keep thinking.  My Lord Pilot, my Lady Sensory,
you are premature.  It is too early for humanity to divide over this issue, when we
have known about it for less than twenty-four hours.  Some rules do not change,
whether it is money at stake, or the fate of an intelligent species.  We should only, at
this stage, be discussing the issue in all its aspects, as thoroughly as possible; we
should not even be placing solutions on the table, as yet, to polarize us into camps. 
You know that, my lords, my ladies, and it does not change."
"And after that?" said the Master of Fandom suddenly.  "Then it's okay to split
humanity?  You wouldn't object?"
The featureless blur concealed within the Confessor's Hood turned to face the Master,
and spoke; and those present thought they heard a grim smile, in that voice.  "Oh,"
said the Confessor, "that would be interfering in politics.  I am charged with guarding
sanity, not morality.  If you want to stay together, do not split.  If you want peace, do
not start wars.  If you want to avoid genocide, do not wipe out an alien species.  But if
these are not your highest values, then you may well end up sacriﬁcing them.  What
you are willing to trade oﬀ, may end up traded away - be you warned!  But if that is
acceptable to you, then so be it.  The Order of Silent Confessors exists in the hope
that, so long as humanity is sane, it can make choices in accordance with its true
desires.  Thus there is our Order dedicated only to that, and sworn not to interfere in
politics.  So you will spend more time discussing this scenario, my lords, my ladies,
and only then generate solutions.  And then... you will decide."
"Excuse me," said the Lady Sensory.  The Lord Pilot made to speak, and Sensory
raised her voice.  "Excuse me, my lords.  The alien ship has just sent us a new
transmission.  Two megabytes of text."
"Translate and publish," ordered Akon.
They all glanced down and aside, waiting for the ﬁle to come up.
It began:
THE UTTERMOST ABYSS OF JUSTIFICATION
A HYMN OF LOGIC
PURE LIKE STONES AND SACRIFICE
FOR STRUGGLES OF THE YOUNG SLIDING DOWN YOUR THROAT-
Akon looked away, wincing.  He hadn't tried to read much of the alien corpus, and
hadn't gotten the knack of reading the "translations" by that damned program.
"Would someone," Akon said, "please tell me - tell the conference - what this says?
There was a long, stretched moment of silence.
Then the Xenopsychologist made a muﬄed noise that could have been a bark of
incredulity, or just a sad laugh.  "Stars beyond," said the Xenopsychologist, "they're
trying to persuade us to eat our own children."
"Using," said the Lord Programmer, "what they assert to be arguments from universal
principles, rather than appeals to mere instincts that might diﬀer from star to star."

"Such as what, exactly?" said the Ship's Confessor.
Akon gave the Confessor an odd look, then quickly glanced away, lest the Confessor
catch him at it.  No, the Confessor couldn't be carefully maintaining an open mind
about that.  It was just curiosity over what particular failures of reasoning the aliens
might exhibit.
"Let me search," said the Lord Programmer.  He was silent for a time.  "Ah, here's an
example.  They point out that by producing many oﬀspring, and winnowing among
them, they apply greater selection pressures to their children than we do.  So if we
started producing hundreds of babies per couple and then eating almost all of them - I
do emphasize that this is their suggestion, not mine - evolution would proceed faster
for us, and we would survive longer in the universe.  Evolution and survival are
universals, so the argument should convince anyone."  He gave a sad chuckle. 
"Anyone here feel convinced?"
"Out of curiosity," said the Lord Pilot, "have they ever tried to produce even more
babies - say, thousands instead of hundreds - so they could speed up their evolution
even more?"
"It ought to be easily within their current capabilities of bioengineering," said the
Xenopsychologist, "and yet they haven't done it.  Still, I don't think we should make
the suggestion.""
"Agreed," said Akon.
"But humanity uses gamete selection," said the Lady Sensory.  "We aren't evolving
any slower.  If anything, choosing among millions of sperm and hundreds of eggs
gives us much stronger selection pressures."
The Xenopsychologist furrowed her brow.  "I'm not sure we sent them that information
in so many words... or they may have just not gotten that far into what we sent
them..."
"Um, it wouldn't be trivial for them to understand," said the Ship's Engineer.  "They
don't have separate DNA and proteins, just crystal patterns tiling themselves.  The
two parents intertwine and stay that way for, um, days, nucleating portions of
supercooled liquid from their own bodies to construct the babies.  The whole, um,
baby, is constructed together by both parents.  They don't have separate gametes
they could select on."
"But," said the Lady Sensory, "couldn't we maybe convince them, to work out some
equivalent of gamete selection and try that instead -"
"My lady," said the Xenopsychologist.  Her voice, now, was somewhat exasperated. 
"They aren't really doing this for the sake of evolution.  They were eating babies
millions of years before they knew what evolution was."
"Huh, this is interesting," said the Lord Programmer.  "There's another section here
where they construct their arguments using appeals to historical human authorities."
Akon raised his eyebrows.  "And who, exactly, do they quote in support?"
"Hold on," said the Lord Programmer.  "This has been run through the translator twice,
English to Babyeater to English, so I need to write a program to retrieve the original

text..."  He was silent a few moments.  "I see.  The argument starts by pointing out
how eating your children is proof of sacriﬁce and loyalty to the tribe, then they quote
human authorities on the virtue of sacriﬁce and loyalty.  And ancient environmentalist
arguments about population control, plus... oh, dear.  I don't think they've realized
that Adolf Hitler is a bad guy."
"They wouldn't," said the Xenopsychologist.  "Humans put Hitler in charge of a
country, so we must have considered him a preeminent legalist of his age.  And it
wouldn't occur to the Babyeaters that Adolf Hitler might be regarded by humans as a
bad guy just because he turned segments of his society into lampshades - they have a
custom against that nowadays, but they don't really see it as evil.  If Hitler thought
that gays had defected against the norm, and tried to exterminate them, that looks to
a Babyeater like an honest mistake -"  The Xenopsychologist looked around the table. 
"All right, I'll stop there.  But the Babyeaters don't look back on their history and see
obvious villains in positions of power - certainly not after the dawn of science.  Any
politician who got to the point of being labeled "bad" would be killed and eaten.  The
Babyeaters don't seem to have had humanity's coordination problems.  Or they're just
more rational voters.  Take your pick."
Akon was resting his head in his hands.  "You know," Akon said, "I thought about
composing a message like this to the Babyeaters.  It was a stupid thought, but I kept
turning it over in my mind.  Trying to think about how I might persuade them that
eating babies was... not a good thing."
The Xenopsychologist grimaced.  "The aliens seem to be even more given to
rationalization than we are - which is maybe why their society isn't so rigid as to
actually fall apart - but I don't think you could twist them far enough around to believe
that eating babies was not a babyeating thing."
"And by the same token," Akon said, "I don't think they're particularly likely to
persuade us that eating babies is good."  He sighed.  "Should we just mark the
message as spam?"
"One of us should read it, at least," said the Ship's Confessor.  "They composed their
argument honestly and in all good will.  Humanity also has epistemic standards of
honor to uphold."
"Yes," said the Master.  "I don't quite understand the Babyeater standards of literature,
my lord, but I can tell that this text conforms to their style of... not exactly poetry,
but... they tried to make it aesthetic as well as persuasive."  The Master's eyes
ﬂickered, back and forth.  "I think they even made some parts constant in the total
number of light pulses per argumentative unit, like human prosody, hoping that our
translator would turn it into a human poem.  And... as near as I can judge such things,
this took a lot of eﬀort.  I wouldn't be surprised to ﬁnd that everyone on that ship was
staying up all night working on it."
"Babyeaters don't sleep," said the Engineer sotto vocce.
"Anyway," said the Master.  "If we don't ﬁre on the alien ship - I mean, if this work is
ever carried back to the Babyeater civilization - I suspect the aliens will consider this
one of their great historical works of literature, like Hamlet or Fate/stay night -"
The Lady Sensory cleared her throat.  She was pale, and trembling.

With a sudden black premonition of doom like a training session in Unrestrained
Pessimism, Akon guessed what she would say.
The Lady Sensory said, in an unsteady voice, "My lords, a third ship has jumped into
this system.  Not Babyeater, not human."
To be continued...

The Super Happy People (3/8)
(Part 3 of 8 in "Three Worlds Collide")
...The Lady Sensory said, in an unsteady voice, "My lords, a third ship has jumped into
this system.  Not Babyeater, not human."
The holo showed a triangle marked with three glowing dots, the human ship and the
Babyeater ship and the newcomers.  Then the holo zoomed in, to show -
- the most grotesque spaceship that Akon had ever seen, like a blob festooned with
tentacles festooned with acne festooned with small hairs.  Slowly, the tentacles of the
ship waved, as if in a gentle breeze; and the acne on the tentacles pulsated, as if
preparing to burst.  It was a fractal of ugliness, disgusting at every level of self-
similarity.
"Do the aliens have deﬂectors up?" said Akon.
"My lord," said Lady Sensory, "they don't have any shields raised.  The nova ashes'
radiation doesn't seem to bother them.  Whatever material their ship is made from,
it's just taking the beating."
A silence fell around the table.
"All right," said the Lord Programmer, "that's impressive."
The Lady Sensory jerked, like someone had just slapped her.  "We - we just got a
signal from them in human-standard format, content encoding marked as Modern
English text, followed by a holo -"
"What?" said Akon.  "We haven't transmitted anything to them, how could they
possibly -"
"Um," said the Ship's Engineer.  "What if these aliens really do have, um, 'big angelic
powers'?"
"No," said the Ship's Confessor.  His hood tilted slightly, as if in wry humor.  "It is only
history repeating itself."
"History repeating itself?" said the Master of Fandom.  "You mean that the ship is from
an alternate Everett branch of Earth, or that they somehow independently developed
ship-to-ship communication protocols exactly similar to our -"
"No, you dolt," said the Lord Programmer, "he means that the Babyeaters sent the
new aliens a massive data dump, just like they sent us.  Only this time, the Babyeater
data dump included all the data that we sent the Babyeaters.  Then the new aliens ran
an automatic translation program, like the one we used."
"You gave it away," said the Confessor.  There was a slight laugh in his voice.  "You
should have let them ﬁgure it out on their own.  One so rarely encounters the
apparently supernatural, these days."
Akon shook his head, "Confessor, we don't have time for - never mind.  Sensory, show
the text message."

The Lady Sensory twitched a ﬁnger and -
HOORAY!
WE ARE SO GLAD TO MEET YOU!
THIS IS THE SHIP "PLAY GAMES FOR LOTS OF FUN"
(OPERATED BY CHARGED PARTICLE FINANCIAL FIRMS)
WE LOVE YOU AND WE WANT YOU TO BE SUPER HAPPY.
WOULD YOU LIKE TO HAVE SEX?
Slowly, elaborately, Akon's head dropped to the table with a dull thud.  "Why couldn't
we have been alone in the universe?"
"No, wait," said the Xenopsychologist, "this makes sense."
The Master of Fandom nodded.  "Seems quite straightforward."
"Do enlighten," came a muﬄed tone from where Akon's head rested on the table.
The Xenopsychologist shrugged.  "Evolutionarily speaking, reproduction is probably
the single best guess for an activity that an evolved intelligence would ﬁnd
pleasurable.  When you look at it from that perspective, my lords, my lady, their
message makes perfect sense - it's a universal friendly greeting, like the Pioneer
engraving."
Akon didn't raise his head.  "I wonder what these aliens do," he said through his
shielding arms, "molest kittens?"
"My lord..." said the Ship's Confessor.  Gentle the tone, but the meaning was very
clear.
Akon sighed and straightened up.  "You said their message included a holo, right? 
Let's see it."
The main screen turned on.
There was a moment of silence, and then a strange liquid sound as, in unison,
everyone around the table gasped in shock, even the Ship's Confessor.
For a time after that, no one spoke.  They were just... watching.
"Wow," said the Lady Sensory ﬁnally.  "That's actually... kind of... hot."
Akon tore his eyes away from the writhing human female form, the writhing human
male form, and the writhing alien tentacles.  "But..." Akon said.  "But why is she
pregnant?"
"A better question," said the Lord Programmer, "would be, why are the two of them
reciting multiplication tables?"  He glanced around.  "What, none of you can read
lips?"

"Um..." said the Xenopsychologist.  "Okay, I've got to admit, I can't even begin to
imagine why -"
Then there was a uniform "Ewww..." from around the room.
"Oh, dear," said the Xenopsychologist.  "Oh, dear, I don't think they understood that
part at all."
Akon made a cutting gesture, and the holo switched oﬀ.
"Someone should view the rest of it," said the Ship's Confessor.  "It might contain
important information."
Akon ﬂipped a hand.  "I don't think we'll run short of volunteers to watch disgusting
alien pornography.  Just post it to the ship's 4chan, and check after a few hours to see
if anything was modded up to +5 Insightful."
"These aliens," said the Master of Fandom slowly, "composed that pornography
within... seconds, it must have been.  We couldn't have done that automatically, could
we?"
The Lord Programmer frowned.  "No.  I don't, um, think so.  From a corpus of alien
pornography, automatically generate a holo they would ﬁnd interesting?  Um.  It's not
a problem that I think anyone's tried to solve yet, and they sure didn't get it perfect
the ﬁrst time, but... no."
"How large an angelic power does that imply?"
The Lord Programmer traded glances with the Master.  "Big," the Lord Programmer
said ﬁnally.  "Maybe even epic."
"Or they think on a much faster timescale," said the Confessor softly.  "There is no law
of the universe that their neurons must run at 100Hz."
"My lords," said the Lady Sensory, "we're getting another message; holo with sound,
this time.  It's marked as a real-time communication, my lords."
Akon swallowed, and his ﬁngers automatically straightened the hood of his formal
sweater.  Would the aliens be able to tell if his clothes were sloppy?  He was suddenly
very aware that he hadn't checked his lipstick in three hours.  But it wouldn't do to
keep the visitors waiting...  "All right.  Open a channel to them, transmitting only
myself."
The holo that appeared did nothing to assuage his insecurities.  The man that
appeared was perfectly dressed, utterly perfectly dressed, in business casual more
intimidating than any formality: crushing superiority without the appearance of eﬀort. 
The face was the same way, overwhelmingly handsome without the excuse of
makeup; the fashionable slit vest exposed pectoral muscles that seemed optimally
sculpted without the bulk that comes of exercise -
"Superstimulus!" exclaimed the Ship's Confessor, a sharp warning.
Akon blinked, shrugging oﬀ the fog.  Of course the aliens couldn't possibly really look
like that.  A holo, only an overoptimized holo.  That was a lesson everyone (every
human?) learned before puberty, not to let reality seem diminished by ﬁction.  As the

proverb went, It's bad enough comparing yourself to Isaac Newton without comparing
yourself to Kimball Kinnison.
"Greetings in the name of humanity," said Akon.  "I am Lord Anamaferus Akon,
Conference Chair of the Giant Science Vessel Impossible Possible World.  We -" come
in peace didn't seem appropriate with a Babyeater war under discussion, and many
other polite pleasantries, like pleased to meet you, suddenly seemed too much like
promises and lies, "- didn't quite understand your last message."
"Our apologies," said the perfect ﬁgure on screen.  "You may call me Big Fucking
Edward; as for our species..."  The ﬁgure tilted a head in thought.  "This translation
program is not fully stable; even if I said our proper species-name, who knows how it
would come out.  I would not wish my kind to forever bear an unaesthetic nickname
on account of a translation error."
Akon nodded.  "I understand, Big Fucking Edward."
"Your true language is a format inconceivable to us," said the perfect holo.  "But we do
apologize for any untranslatable 1 you may have experienced on account of our
welcome transmission; it was automatically generated, before any of us had a chance
to apprehend your sexuality.  We do apologize, I say; but who would ever have
thought that a species would evolve to ﬁnd reproduction a painful experience?  For us,
childbirth is the greatest pleasure we know; to be prolonged, not hurried."
"Oh," said the Lady Sensory in a tone of sudden enlightenment, "that's why the
tentacles were pushing the baby back into -"
Out of sight of the visual frame, Akon gestured with his hand for Sensory to shut up. 
Akon leaned forward.  "The visual you're currently sending us is, of course, not real. 
What do you actually look like? - if the request does not oﬀend."
The perfect false man furrowed a brow, puzzled.  "I don't understand.  You would not
be able to apprehend any communicative cues."
"I would still like to see," Akon said.  "I am not sure how to explain it, except that -
truth matters to us."
The too-beautiful man vanished, and in his place -
Mad brilliant colors, insane hues that for a moment defeated his vision.  Then his mind
saw shapes, but not meaning.  In utter silence, huge blobs writhed around supporting
bars.  Extrusions protruded ﬂuidly and interpenetrated -
Writhing, twisting, shuddering, pulsating -
And then the false man reappeared.
Akon fought to keep his face from showing distress, but a prickling of sweat appeared
on his forehead.  There'd been something jarring about the blobs, even the stable
background behind them.  Like looking at an optical illusion designed by sadists.
And - those were the aliens, or so they claimed -
"I have a question," said the false man.  "I apologize if it causes any distress, but I
must know if what our scientists say is correct.  Has your kind really evolved separate

information-processing mechanisms for deoxyribose nucleic acid versus
electrochemical transmission of synaptic spikes?"
Akon blinked.  Out of the corner of his eye, he saw ﬁgures trading cautious glances
around the table.  Akon wasn't sure where this question was leading, but, given that
the aliens had already understood enough to ask, it probably wasn't safe to lie...
"I don't really understand the question's purpose," Akon said.  "Our genes are made of
deoxyribose nucleic acid.  Our brains are made of neurons that transmit impulses
through electrical and chemical -"
The fake man's head collapsed to his hands, and he began to bawl like a baby.
Akon's hand signed Help! out of the frame.  But the Xenopsychologist shrugged
cluelessly.
This was not going well.
The fake man suddenly unfolded his head from his hands.  His cheeks were depicted
as streaked with tears, but the face itself had stopped crying.  "To wait so long," the
voice said in a tone of absolute tragedy.  "To wait so long, and come so far, only to
discover that nowhere among the stars is any trace of love."
"Love?" Akon repeated.  "Caring for someone else?  Wanting to protect them, to be
with them?  If that translated correctly, then 'love' is a very important thing to us."
"But!" cried the ﬁgure in agony, at a volume that made Akon jump.  "But when you
have sex, you do not untranslatable 2!  A fake, a fake, these are only imitation words -
"
"What is 'untranslatable 2'?" Akon said; and then, as the ﬁgure once again collapsed in
inconsolable weeping, wished he hadn't.
"They asked if our neurons and DNA were separate," said the Ship's Engineer.  "So
maybe they have only one system.  Um... in retrospect, that actually seems like the
obvious way for evolution to do it.  If you're going to have one kind of information
storage for genes, why have an entirely diﬀerent system for brains?  So -"
"They share each other's thoughts when they have sex," the Master of Fandom
completed.  "Now there's an old dream.  And they would develop emotions around
that, whole patterns of feeling we don't have ourselves...  Huh.  I guess we do lack
their analogue of love."
"Probably," said the Xenopsychologist quietly, "sex was their only way of speaking to
each other from the beginning.  From before the dawn of their intelligence.  It really
does make a lot of sense, evolutionarily.  If you're injecting packets of information
anyway -"
"Wait a minute," said the Lady Sensory, "then how are they talking to us?"
"Of course," said the Lord Programmer in a tone of sudden enlightenment.  "Humanity
has always used new communications technologies for pornography.  'The Internet is
for porn' - but with them, it must have been the other way around."

Akon blinked.  His mind suddenly pictured the blobs, and the tentacles connecting
them to each other -
Somewhere on that ship is a blob making love to an avatar that's supposed to
represent me.  Maybe a whole Command Orgy.
I've just been cyber-raped.  No, I'm being cyber-raped right now.
And the aliens had crossed who knew how much space, searching for who knew how
long, yearning to speak / make love to other minds - only to ﬁnd -
The fake man suddenly jerked upright and screamed at a volume that whited-out the
speakers in the Command Conference.  Everyone jumped; the Master of Fandom let
out a small shriek.
What did I do what did I do what did I do -
And then the holo vanished.
Akon gasped for breath and slumped over in his chair.  Adrenaline was still running riot
through his system, but he felt utterly exhausted.  He wanted to release his shape and
melt into a puddle, a blob like the wrong shapes he'd seen on screen - no, not like
that.
"My lord," the Ship's Confessor said softly.  He was now standing alongside, a gentle
hand on Akon's shoulder.  "My lord, are you all right?"
"Not really," Akon said.  His voice, he was proud to note, was only slighly wobbly.  "It's
too hard, speaking to aliens.  They don't think like you do, and you don't know what
you're doing wrong."
"I wonder," the Master of Fandom said with artiﬁcial lightness, "if they'll call it
'xenofatigue' and forbid anyone to talk to an alien for longer than ﬁve minutes."
Akon just nodded.
"We're getting another signal," the Lady Sensory said hesitantly.  "Holo with sound,
another real-time communication."
"Akon, you don't have to -" said the Master of Fandom.
Akon jerked himself upright, straightened his clothes.  "I do have to," he said. 
"They're aliens, there's no knowing what a delay might...  Just put it through."
The ﬁrst thing the holo showed, in elegant Modern English script, was the message:
The Lady 3rd Kiritsugu
    temporary co-chair of the Gameplayer
        Language Translator version 3
        Cultural Translator version 2
The screen hovered just long enough to be read, then dissipated -
Revealing a pale white lady.

The translator's depiction of the Lady 3rd Kiritsugu was all white and black and grey;
not the colorlessness of a greyscale image, but a colored image of a world with little
color in it.  Skin the color of the palest human skin that could still be called attractive;
not snow white, but pale.  White hair; blouse and bracelets and long dress all in
coordinated shades of grey.  That woman could have been called pretty, but there was
none of the overstimulating beauty of the fake man who had been shown before.
Her face was styled in the emotion that humans named "serene".
"I and my sisters have now taken command of this vessel," said the pale Lady.
Akon blinked.  A mutiny aboard their ship?
And it was back to the alien incomprehensibility, the knife-edged decisions and
unpredictable reactions and the deadly fear of screwing up.
"I am sorry if my words oﬀend," Akon said carefully, "but there is something I wish to
know."
The Lady 3rd made a slicing gesture with one hand.  "You cannot oﬀend me."  Her
face showed mild insult at the suggestion.
"What has happened aboard your ship, just now?"
The Lady 3rd replied, "The crew are disabled by emotional distress.  They have
exceeded the bounds of their obligations, and are returning to the ship's Pleasuring
Center for reward.  In such a situation I and my two sisters, the kiritsugu of this vessel,
assume command."
Did I do that?  "I did not intend for my words to cause you psychological harm."
"You are not responsible," the Lady 3rd said.  "It was the other ones."
"The Babyeaters?" Akon said without thinking.
"Babyeaters," the Lady 3rd repeated.  "If that is the name you have given to the third
alien species present at this star system, then yes.  The crew, apprehending the
nature of the Babyeaters' existence, was incapacitated by their share of the children's
suﬀering."
"I see," Akon said.  He felt an odd twitch of shame for humanity, that his own kind
could learn of the Babyeaters, and continue functioning with only tears.
The Lady 3rd's gaze grew sharp.  "What are your intentions regarding the
Babyeaters?"
"We haven't decided," Akon said.  "We were just discussing it when you arrived,
actually."
"What is your current most preferred alternative?" the Lady 3rd instantly ﬁred back.
Akon helplessly shrugged, palms out.  "We were just starting the discussion.  All the
alternatives suggested seemed unacceptable."
"Which seemed least unacceptable?  What is your current best candidate?"

Akon shook his head.  "We haven't designated any."
The Lady 3rd's face grew stern, with a hint of puzzlement.  "You are withholding the
information.  Why?  Do you think it will cast you in an unfavorable light?  Then I must
take that expectation into account.  Further, you must expect me to take that
expectation into account, and so you imply that you expect me to underestimate its
severity, even after taking this line of reasoning into account."
"Excuse me," the Ship's Confessor said.  His tone was mild, but with a hint of urgency. 
"I believe I should enter this conversation right now."
Akon's hand signed agreement to the Lady Sensory.
At once the Lady 3rd's eyes shifted to where the Confessor stood beside Akon.
"Human beings," said the Ship's Confessor, "cannot designate a 'current best
candidate' without psychological consequences.  Human rationalists learn to discuss
an issue as thoroughly as possible before suggesting any solutions.  For humans,
solutions are sticky in a way that would require detailed cognitive science to explain. 
We would not be able to search freely through the solution space, but would be
helplessly attracted toward the 'current best' point, once we named it.  Also, any
endorsement whatever of a solution that has negative moral features, will cause a
human to feel shame - and 'best candidate' would feel like an endorsement.  To avoid
feeling that shame, humans must avoid saying which of two bad alternatives is better
than the other."
Ouch, thought Akon, I never realized how embarrassing that sounds until I heard it
explained to an alien.
Apparently the alien was having similar thoughts.  "So you cannot even tell me which
of several alternatives currently seems best, without your minds breaking down?  That
sounds quite implausible," the Lady 3rd said doubtfully, "for a species capable of
building a spaceship."
There was a hint of laughter in the Confessor's voice.  "We try to overcome our
biases."
The Lady 3rd's gaze grew more intense.  "Are you the true decisionmaker of this
vessel?"
"I am not," the Confessor said ﬂatly.  "I am a Confessor - a human master rationalist;
we are sworn to refrain from leadership."
"This meeting will determine the future of all three species," said the Lady 3rd.  "If you
have superior competence, you should assume control."
Akon's brows furrowed slightly.  Somehow he'd never thought about it in those terms.
The Confessor shook his head.  "There are reasons beyond my profession why I must
not lead.  I am too old."
Too old?
Akon put the thought on hold, and looked back at the Lady 3rd.  She had said that all
the crew were incapacitated, except her and her two sisters who took charge.  And

she had asked the Confessor if he held true command.
"Are you," Akon asked, "the equivalent of a Confessor for your own kind?"
"Almost certainly not," replied the Lady 3rd, and -
"Almost certainly not," the Confessor said, almost in the same breath.
There was an eerie kind of unison about it.
"I am kiritsugu," said the Lady 3rd.  "In the early days of my species there were those
who refrained from happiness in order to achieve perfect skill in helping others, using
untranslatable 3 to suppress their emotions and acting only on their abstract
knowledge of goals.  These were forcibly returned to normality by massive
untranslatable 4.  But I descend from their thought-lineage and in emergency invoke
the shadow of their untranslatable 5."
"I am a Confessor," said the Ship's Confessor, "the descendant of those in humanity's
past who most highly valued truth, who sought systematic methods for ﬁnding truth. 
But Bayes's Theorem will not be diﬀerent from one place to another; the laws in their
purely mathematical form will be the same, just as any suﬃciently advanced species
will discover the same periodic table of elements."
"And being universals," said the Lady 3rd, "they bear no distinguishing evidence of
their origin.  So you should understand, Lord Akon, that a kiritsugu's purpose is not
like that of a Confessor, even if we exploit the same laws."
"But we are similar enough to each other," the Confessor concluded, "to see each
other as distorted mirror images.  Heretics, you might say.  She is the ultimate sin
forbidden to a Confessor - the exercise of command."
"As you are ﬂawed on my own terms," the Lady 3rd concluded, "one who refuses to
help."
Everyone else at the Conference table was staring at the alien holo, and at the
Confessor, in something approaching outright horror.
The Lady 3rd shifted her gaze back to Akon.  Though it was only a movement of the
eyes, there was something of a deﬁnite force about the motion, as if the translator
was indicating that it stood for something much stronger.  Her voice was given a
demanding, compelling quality:  "What alternatives did your kind generate for dealing
with the Babyeaters?  Enumerate them to me."
Wipe out their species, keep them in prison forever on suicide watch, ignore them and
let the children suﬀer.
Akon hesitated.  An odd premonition of warning prickled at him.  Why does she need
this information?
"If you do not give me the information," the Lady 3rd said, "I will take into account the
fact that you do not wish me to know it."
The proverb went through his mind, The most important part of any secret is the fact
that the secret exists.

"All right," Akon said.  "We found unacceptable the alternative of leaving the
Babyeaters be.  We found unacceptable the alternative of exterminating them.  We
wish to respect their choices and their nature as a species, but their children, who do
not share that choice, are unwilling victims; this is unacceptable to us.  We desire to
keep the children alive but we do not know what to do with them once they become
adult and start wanting to eat their own babies.  Those were all the alternatives we
had gotten as far as generating, at the very moment your ship arrived."
"That is all?" demanded the Lady 3rd.  "That is the sum of all your thought?  Is this
one of the circumstances under which your species sends signals that diﬀer against
internal belief, such as 'joking' or 'politeness'?"
"No," said Akon.  "I mean, yes.  Yes, that's as far as we got.  No, we're not joking."
"You should understand," the Confessor said, "that this crew, also, experienced a
certain distress, interfering with our normal function, on comprehending the
Babyeaters.  We are still experiencing it."
And you acted to restore order, thought Akon, though not the same way as a
kiritsugu...
"I see," the Lady 3rd said.
She fell silent.  There were long seconds during which she sat motionless.
Then, "Why have you not yet disabled the Babyeater ship?  Your craft possesses the
capability of doing so, and you must realize that your purpose now opposes theirs."
"Because," Akon said, "they did not disable our ship."
The Lady 3rd nodded.  "You are symmetrists, then."
Again the silence.
Then the holo blurred, and in that blur appeared the words:
Cultural Translator version 3.
The blur resolved itself back into that pale woman; almost the same as before, except
that the serenity of her came through with more force.
The Lady 3rd drew herself erect, and took on a look of ritual, as though she were
about to recite a composed poem.
"I now speak," the Lady 3rd, "on behalf of my species, to yours."
A chill ran down Akon's spine.  This is too much, this is all too large for me -
"Humankind!" the Lady 3rd said, as though addressing someone by name. 
"Humankind, you prefer the absence of pain to its presence.  When my own kind
attained to technology, we eliminated the causes of suﬀering among ourselves. 
Bodily pain, embarrassment, and romantic conﬂicts are no longer permitted to exist. 
Humankind, you prefer the presence of pleasure to its absence.  We have devoted
ourselves to the intensity of pleasure, of sex and childbirth and untranslatable 2. 
Humankind, you prefer truth to lies.  By our nature we do not communicate
statements disbelieved, as you do with humor, modesty, and ﬁction; we have even

learned to refrain from withholding information, though we possess that capability. 
Humankind, you prefer peace to violence.  Our society is without crime and without
war.  Through symmetric sharing and untranslatable 4, we share our joys and are
pleasured together.  Our name for ourselves is not expressible in your language.  But
to you, humankind, we now name ourselves after the highest values we share: we are
the Maximum Fun-Fun Ultra Super Happy People."
There were muﬄed choking sounds from the human Conference table.
"Um," Akon said intelligently.  "Um... good for you?"
"Humankind!  Humankind, you did not likewise repair yourselves when you attained to
technology.  We are still unsure if it is somehow a mistake, if you did not think it
through, or if your will is truly so diﬀerent from ours.  For whatever reason, you
currently permit the existence of suﬀering which our species has eliminated.  Bodily
pain, embarrassment, and romantic troubles are still known among you.  Your
existence, therefore, is shared by us as pain.  Will you, humankind, by your symmetry,
remedy this?"
An electric current of shock and alarm ran through the Conference.  The Lord Pilot
glanced signiﬁcantly at the Ship's Engineer, and the Engineer just as signiﬁcantly
shook his head.  There was nothing they could do against the alien vessel; and their
own shields would scarcely help, if they were attacked.
Akon drew in a ragged breath.  He was suddenly distracted, almost to the point of his
brain melting, by a sense of futures twisting around these moments: the fate of star
systems, the destiny of all humanity being warped and twisted and shaped.
So to you, then, it is humanity that molests kittens.
He should have foreseen this possibility, after the experience of the Babyeaters.  If the
Babyeaters' existence was morally unacceptable to humanity, then the next alien
species might be intolerable as well - or they might ﬁnd humanity's existence a horror
of unspeakable cruelty.  That was the other side of the coin, even if a human might
ﬁnd it harder to think of it.
Funny.  It doesn't seem that bad from in here...
"But -" Akon said, and only then became aware that he was speaking.
"'But'?" said the Lady 3rd.  "Is that your whole reply, humankind?"  There was a look
on her face of something like frustration, even sheer astonishment.
He hadn't planned out this reply in any detail, but -
"You say that you feel our existence as pain," Akon said, "sharing sympathy with our
own suﬀering.  So you, also, believe that under some circumstances pain is preferable
to pleasure.  If you did not hurt when others hurt - would you not feel that you were...
less the sort of person you wanted to be?  It is the same with us -"
But the Lady 3rd was shaking her head.  "You confuse a high conditional likelihood
from your hypothesis to the evidence with a high posterior probability of the
hypothesis given the evidence," she said, as if that were all one short phrase in her
own language.  "Humankind, we possess a generalized faculty to feel what others
feel.  That is the simple, compact relation.  We did not think to complicate that faculty

to exclude pain.  We did not then assign dense probability that other sentient species
would traverse the stars, and be encountered by us, and yet fail to have repaired
themselves.  Should we encounter some future species in circumstances that do not
permit its repair, we will modify our empathic faculty to exclude sympathy with pain,
and substitute an urge to meliorate pain."
"But -" Akon said.
Dammit, I'm talking again.
"But we chose this; this is what we want."
"That matters less to our values than to yours," replied the Lady 3rd.  "But even you,
humankind, should see that it is moot.  We are still trying to untangle the twisting
references of emotion by which humans might prefer pleasure to pain, and yet
endorse complex theories that uphold pain over pleasure.  But we have already
determined that your children, humankind, do not share the grounding of these
philosophies.  When they incur pain they do not contemplate its meaning, they only
call for it to stop.  In their simplicity -"
They're a lot like our own children, really.
"- they somewhat resemble the earlier life stages of our own kind."
There was a electric quality now about that pale woman, a terrible intensity.  "And you
should understand, humankind, that when a child anywhere suﬀers pain and calls for
it to stop, then we will answer that call if it requires sixty-ﬁve thousand ﬁve hundred
and thirty-six ships."
"We believe, humankind, that you can understand our viewpoint.  Have you options to
oﬀer us?"
To be continued...

Interlude with the Confessor (4/8)
(Part 4 of 8 in "Three Worlds Collide")
The two of them were alone now, in the Conference Chair's Privilege, the huge private
room of luxury more suited to a planet than to space.  The Privilege was tiled wall-to-
wall and ﬂoor-to-ceiling with a most excellent holo of the space surrounding them: the
distant stars, the system's sun, the ﬂeeing nova ashes, and the glowing ember of the
dwarf star that had siphoned oﬀ hydrogen from the main sun until its surface had
brieﬂy ignited in a nova ﬂash.  It was like falling through the void.
Akon sat on the edge of the four-poster bed in the center of the room, resting his head
in his hands.  Weariness dulled him at the moment when he most needed his wits; it
was always like that in crisis, but this was unusually bad.  Under the circumstances, he
didn't dare snort a hit of caﬀeine - it might reorder his priorities.  Humanity had yet to
discover the drug that was pure energy, that would improve your thinking without the
slightest touch on your emotions and values.
"I don't know what to think," Akon said.
The Ship's Confessor was standing stately nearby, in full robes and hood of silver. 
From beneath the hood came the formal response:  "What seems to be confusing you,
my friend?"
"Did we go wrong?" Akon said.  No matter how hard he tried, he couldn't keep the
despair out of his voice.  "Did humanity go down the wrong path?"
The Confessor was silent a long time.
Akon waited.  This was why he couldn't have talked about the question with anyone
else.  Only a Confessor would actually think before answering, if asked a question like
that.
"I've often wondered that myself," the Confessor ﬁnally said, surprising Akon.  "There
were so many choices, so many branchings in human history - what are the odds we
got them all right?"
The hood turned away, angling in the direction of the Superhappy ship - though it was
too far away to be visible, everyone on board the Impossible Possible World knew
where it was.  "There are parts of your question I can't help you with, my lord.  Of all
people on this ship, I might be most poorly suited to answer...  But you do understand,
my lord, don't you, that neither the Babyeaters nor the Superhappies are evidence
that we went wrong?  If you weren't worried before, you shouldn't be any more
worried now.  The Babyeaters strive to do the baby-eating thing to do, the
Superhappies output the Super Happy thing to do.  None of that tells us anything
about the right thing to do.  They are not asking the same question we are - no matter
what word of their language the translator links to our 'should'.  If you're confused at
all about that, my lord, I might be able to clear it up."
"I know the theory," Akon said.  Exhaustion in his voice.  "They made me study
metaethics when I was a little kid, sixteen years old and still in the children's world. 
Just so that I would never be tempted to think that God or ontologically basic moral
facts or whatever had the right to override my own scruples."  Akon slumped a little

further.  "And somehow - none of that really makes a diﬀerence when you're looking at
the Lady 3rd, and wondering why, when there's a ten-year-old with a broken ﬁnger in
front of you, screaming and crying, we humans only partially numb the area."
The Confessor's hood turned back to look at Akon.  "You do realize that your brain is
literally hardwired to generate error signals when it sees other human-shaped objects
stating a diﬀerent opinion from yourself.  You do realize that, my lord?"
"I know," Akon said.  "That, too, we are taught.  Unfortunately, I am also just now
realizing that I've only been going along with society all my life, and that I never
thought the matter through for myself, until now."
A sigh came from that hood.  "Well... would you prefer a life entirely free of pain and
sorrow, having sex all day long?"
"Not... really," Akon said.
The shoulders of the robe shrugged.  "You have judged.  What else is there?"
Akon stared straight at that anonymizing robe, the hood containing a holo of dark
mist, a shadow that always obscured the face inside.  The voice was also anonymized
- altered slightly, not in any obtrusive way, but you wouldn't know your own Confessor
to hear him speak.  Akon had no idea who the Confessor might be, outside that robe. 
There were rumors of Confessors who had somehow arranged to be seen in the
company of their own secret identity...
Akon drew a breath.  "You said that you, of all people, could not say whether humanity
had gone down the wrong path.  The simple fact of being a Confessor should have no
bearing on that; rationalists are also human.  And you told the Lady 3rd that you were
too old to make decisions for your species.  Just how old are you... honorable
ancestor?"
There was a silence.
It didn't last long.
As though the decision had already been foreseen, premade and preplanned, the
Confessor's hands moved easily upward and drew back the hood - revealing an
unblended face, strangely colored skin and shockingly distinctive features.  A face out
of forgotten history, which could only have come from a time before the genetic
mixing of the 21st century, untouched by DNA insertion or diaspora.
Even though Akon had been half-expecting it, he still gasped out loud.  Less than one
in a million:  That was the percentage of the current human population that had been
born on Earth before the invention of antiagathics or star travel, ﬁve hundred years
ago.
"Congratulations on your guess," the Confessor said.  The unaltered voice was only
slightly diﬀerent; but it was stronger, more masculine.
"Then you were there," Akon said.  He felt almost breathless, and tried not to show it. 
"You were alive - all the way back in the days of the initial biotech revolution!  That
would have been when humanity ﬁrst debated whether to go down the Super Happy
path."

The Confessor nodded.
"Which side did you argue?"
The Confessor's face froze for a moment, and then he emitted a brief chuckle, one
short laugh.  "You have entirely the wrong idea about how things were done, back
then.  I suppose it's natural."
"I don't understand," Akon said.
"And there are no words that I can speak to make you understand.  It is beyond your
imagining.  But you should not imagine that a violent thief whose closest approach to
industry was selling uncertiﬁed hard drugs - you should not imagine, my lord, my
honorable descendant, that I was ever asked to take sides."
Akon's eyes slid away from the hot gaze of the unmixed man; there was something
wrong about the thread of anger still there in the memory after ﬁve hundred years.
"But time passed," the Confessor said, "time moved forward, and things changed." 
The eyes were no longer focused on Akon, looking now at something far away.  "There
was an old saying, to the eﬀect that while someone with a single bee sting will pay
much for a remedy, to someone with ﬁve bee stings, removing just one sting seems
less attractive.  That was humanity in the ancient days.  There was so much wrong
with the world that the small resources of altruism were splintered among ten
thousand urgent charities, and none of it ever seemed to go anywhere.  And yet... and
yet..."
"There was a threshold crossed somewhere," said the Confessor, "without a single
apocalypse to mark it.  Fewer wars.  Less starvation.  Better technology.  The economy
kept growing.  People had more resource to spare for charity, and the altruists had
fewer and fewer causes to choose from.  They came even to me, in my time, and
rescued me.  Earth cleaned itself up, and whenever something threatened to go
drastically wrong again, the whole attention of the planet turned in that direction and
took care of it.  Humanity ﬁnally got its act together."
The Confessor worked his jaws as if there were something stuck in his throat.  "I doubt
you can even imagine, my honorable descendant, just how much of an impossible
dream that once was.  But I will not call this path mistaken."
"No, I can't imagine," Akon said quietly.  "I once tried to read some of the pre-Dawn
Net.  I thought I wanted to know, I really did, but I - just couldn't handle it.  I doubt
anyone on this ship can handle it except you.  Honorable ancestor, shouldn't we be
asking you how to deal with the Babyeaters and the Superhappies?  You are the only
one here who's ever dealt with that level of emergency."
"No," said the Confessor, like an absolute order handed down from outside the
universe.  "You are the world that we wanted to create.  Though I can't say we.  That is
just a distortion of memory, a romantic gloss on history fading into mist.  I wasn't one
of the dreamers, back then.  I was just wrapped up in my private blanket of hurt.  But
if my pain meant anything, Akon, it is as part of the long price of a better world than
that one.  If you look back at ancient Earth, and are horriﬁed - then that means it was
all for something, don't you see?  You are the beautiful and shining children, and this
is your world, and you are the ones who must decide what to do with it now."
Akon started to speak, to demur -

The Confessor held up a hand.  "I mean it, my lord Akon.  It is not polite idealism.  We
ancients can't steer.  We remember too much disaster.  We're too cautious to dare the
bold path forward.  Do you know there was a time when nonconsensual sex was
illegal?"
Akon wasn't sure whether to smile or grimace.  "The Prohibition, right?  During the
ﬁrst century pre-Net?  I expect everyone was glad to have that law taken oﬀ the
books.  I can't imagine how boring your sex lives must have been up until then -
ﬂirting with a woman, teasing her, leading her on, knowing the whole time that you
were perfectly safe because she couldn't take matters into her own hands if you went
a little too far -"
"You need a history refresher, my Lord Administrator.  At some suitably abstract level. 
What I'm trying to tell you - and this is not public knowledge - is that we nearly tried to
overthrow your government."
"What?" said Akon.  "The Confessors?"
"No, us.  The ones who remembered the ancient world.  Back then we still had our
hands on a large share of the capital and tremendous inﬂuence in the grant
committees.  When our children legalized rape, we thought that the Future had gone
wrong."
Akon's mouth hung open.  "You were that prude?"
The Confessor shook his head.  "There aren't any words," the Confessor said, "there
aren't any words at all, by which I ever could explain to you.  No, it wasn't prudery.  It
was a memory of disaster."
"Um," Akon said.  He was trying not to smile.  "I'm trying to visualize what sort of
disaster could have been caused by too much nonconsensual sex -"
"Give it up, my lord," the Confessor said.  He was ﬁnally laughing, but there was an
undertone of pain to it.  "Without, shall we say, personal experience, you can't
possibly imagine, and there's no point in trying."
"Well, out of curiosity - how much did you lose?"
The Confessor seemed to freeze, for a moment.  "What?"
"How much did you lose in the legislative prediction markets, betting on whatever
dreadful outcome you thought would happen?"
"You really wouldn't ever understand," the Confessor said.  His smile was entirely real,
now.  "But now you know, don't you?  You know, after speaking to me, that I can't ever
be allowed to make decisions for humankind."
Akon hesitated.  It was odd... he did know, on some gut level.  And he couldn't have
explained on any verbal level why.  Just - that hint of wrongness.
"So now you know," the Confessor repeated.  "And because we do remember so much
disaster - and because it is a profession that beneﬁts from being ﬁve hundred years
old - many of us became Confessors.  Being the voice of pessimism comes easily to
us, and few indeed are those among the human kind who must rationally be nudged
upward...  We advise, but do not lead.  Debate, but do not decide.  We're going along

for your ride, and trying not to be too shocked so that we can be almost as delighted
as you.  You might ﬁnd yourself in a similar situation in ﬁve hundred years... if
humanity survives this week."
"Ah, yes," Akon said dryly.  "The aliens.  The current problem of discourse."
"Yes.  Have you had any thoughts on the subject?"
"Only that I really do wish that humanity had been alone in the universe."  Akon's
hand suddenly formed a ﬁst and smashed hard against the bed.  "Fuck it!  I know how
the Superhappies felt when they discovered that we and the Babyeaters hadn't
'repaired ourselves'.  You understand what this implies about what the rest of the
universe looks like, statistically speaking?  Even if it's just a sample of two?  I'm sure
that somewhere out there are likable neighbors.  Just as somewhere out there, if we
go far enough through the inﬁnite universe, there's a person who's an exact duplicate
of me down to the atomic level.  But every other species we ever actually meet is
probably going to be -"  Akon drew a breath.  "It wasn't supposed to be like this, damn
it!  All three of our species have empathy, we have sympathy, we have a sense of
fairness - the Babyeaters even tell stories like we do, they have art.  Shouldn't that be
enough?  Wasn't that supposed to be enough?  But all it does is put us into enough of
the same reference frame that we can be horrible by each others' standards."
"Don't take this the wrong way," the Confessor said, "but I'm glad that we ran across
the Babyeaters."
Words stuck in Akon's throat.  "What?"
A half-smile twisted up one corner of the Confessor's face.  "Because if we hadn't run
across the Babyeaters, we couldn't possibly rescue the babies, now could we?  Not
knowing about their existence wouldn't mean they weren't there.  The Babyeater
children would still exist.  They would still die in horrible agony.  We just wouldn't be
able to help them.  If we didn't know it wouldn't be our fault, our responsibility - but
that's not something you're supposed to optimize for."  The Confessor paused.  "Of
course I understand how you feel.  But on this vessel I am humanity's token attempt
at sanity, and it is my duty to think certain strange yet logical thoughts."
"And the Superhappies?" Akon said.  "The race with superior technology that may
decide to exterminate us, or keep us in prison, or take our children away?  Is there any
silver lining to that?"
"The Superhappies aren't so far from us," the Confessor said.  "We could have gone
down the Super Happy path.  We nearly did - you might have trouble imagining just
how attractive the absence of pain can sound, under certain circumstances.  In a
sense, you could say that I tried to go down that path - though I wasn't a very
competent neuroengineer.  If human nature had been only slightly diﬀerent, we could
easily have been within that attractor.  And the Super Happy civilization is not hateful
to us, whatever we are to them.  That's good news at least, for how the rest of the
universe might look."  The Confessor paused.  "And..."
"And?"
The Confessor's voice became harder.  "And the Superhappies will rescue the
Babyeater children no matter what, I think, even if humanity should fail in the task. 
Considering how many Babyeater children are dying, and in what pain - that could
outweigh even our own extermination.  Shut up and multiply, as the saying goes."

"Oh, come on!" Akon said, too surprised to be shocked.  "If the Superhappies hadn't
shown up, we would have - well, we would have done something about the
Babyeaters, once we decided what.  We wouldn't have just let the, the -"
"Holocaust," the Confessor oﬀered.
"Good word for it.  We wouldn't have just let the Holocaust go on."
"You would be astounded, my lord, at what human beings will just let go on.  Do you
realize the expenditure of capital, labor, maybe even human lives required to invade
every part of the Babyeater civilization?  To trace out every part of their starline
network, push our technological advantage to its limit to build faster ships that can
hunt down every Babyeater ship that tries to ﬂee?  Do you realize -"
"I'm sorry.  You are simply mistaken as a question of fact."  Boy, thought Akon, you
don't often get to say that to a Confessor.  "This is not your birth era, honorable
ancestor.  We are the humanity that has its shit together.  If the Superhappies had
never come along, humanity would have done whatever it took to rescue the
Babyeater children.  You saw the Lord Pilot, the Lady Sensory; they were ready to
secede from civilization if that's what it took to get the job done.  And that, honorable
ancestor, is how most people would react."
"For a moment," said the Confessor.  "In the moment of ﬁrst hearing the news.  When
talk was cheap.  When they hadn't yet visualized the costs.  But once they did, there
would be an uneasy pause, while everyone waited to see if someone else might act
ﬁrst.  And faster than you imagine possible, people would adjust to that state of
aﬀairs.  It would no longer sound quite so shocking as it did at ﬁrst.  Babyeater
children are dying horrible, agonizing deaths in their parents' stomachs?  Deplorable,
of course, but things have always been that way.  It would no longer be news.  It
would all be part of the plan."
"Are you high on something?" Akon said.  It wasn't the most polite way he could have
phrased it, but he couldn't help himself.
The Confessor's voice was as cold and hard as an iron sun, after the universe had
burned down to embers.  "Innocent youth, when you have watched your older brother
beaten almost to death before your eyes, and seen how little the police investigate -
when you have watched all four of your grandparents wither away like rotten fruit and
cease to exist, while you spoke not one word of protest because you thought it was
normal - then you may speak to me of what human beings will tolerate."
"I don't believe we would do that," Akon said as mildly as possible.
"Then you fail as a rationalist," the Confessor said.  His unhooded head turned toward
the false walls, to look out at the accurately represented stars.  "But I - I will not fail
again."
"Well, you're damn right about one thing," Akon said.  He was too exhausted to be
tactful.  "You can't ever be allowed to make decisions for the human species."
"I know.  Believe me, I know.  Only youth can Administrate.  That is the pact of
immortality."
Akon stood up from the bed.  "Thank you, Confessor.  You have helped me."

With an easy, practiced motion, the Confessor slid the hood of his robe over his head,
and the stark features vanished into shadow.  "I have?" the Confessor said, and his
recloaked voice sounded strangely mild, after that earlier masculine power.  "How?"
Akon shrugged.  He didn't think he could put it into words.  It had something to do
with the terrible vast sweep of Time across the centuries, and so much true change
that had already happened, deeper by far than anything he had witnessed in his own
lifetime; the requirement of courage to face the future, and the sacriﬁces that had
been made for it; and that not everyone had been saved, once upon a time.
"I guess you reminded me," Akon said, "that you can't always get everything you
want."
To be continued...
A reminder:  This is a work of ﬁction.  In real life, continuing to attempt to have sex
with someone after they say 'no' and before they say 'yes', whether or not they oﬀer
forceful resistance and whether or not any visible injury occurs, is (in the USA) deﬁned
as rape and considered a federal felony.  I agree with and support that this is the
correct place for society to draw the line.  Some people have worked out a safeword
system in which they explicitly and verbally agree, with each other or on a signed
form, that 'no' doesn't mean stop but e.g. 'red' or 'safeword' does mean stop.  I agree
with and support this as carving out a safe exception whose existence does not
endanger innocent bystanders.  If either of these statements come to you as a
surprise then you should look stuﬀ up.  Thank you and remember, your safeword
should be at least 10 characters and contain a mixture of letters and numbers.  We
now return you to your regularly scheduled reading.  Yours, the author.

Three Worlds Decide (5/8)
(Part 5 of 8 in "Three Worlds Collide")
Akon strode into the main Conference Room; and though he walked like a physically
exhausted man, at least his face was determined.  Behind him, the shadowy
Confessor followed.
The Command Conference looked up at him, and exchanged glances.
"You look better," the Ship's Master of Fandom ventured.
Akon put a hand on the back of his seat, and paused.  Someone was absent.  "The
Ship's Engineer?"
The Lord Programmer frowned.  "He said he had an experiment to run, my lord.  He
refused to clarify further, but I suppose it must have something to do with the
Babyeaters' data -"
"You're joking," Akon said.  "Our Ship's Engineer is oﬀ Nobel-hunting?  Now?  With the
fate of the human species at stake?"
The Lord Programmer shrugged.  "He seemed to think it was important, my lord."
Akon sighed.  He pulled his chair back and half-slid, half-fell into it.  "I don't suppose
that the ship's markets have settled down?"
The Lord Pilot grinned sardonically.  "Read for yourself."
Akon twitched, calling up a screen.  "Ah, I see.  The ship's Interpreter of the Market's
Will reports, and I quote, 'Every single one of the underlying assets in my market is
going up and down like a fucking yo-yo while the ship's hedgers try to adjust to a
Black Swan that's going to wipe out ninety-eight percent of their planetside risk
capital.  Even the spot prices on this ship are going crazy; either we've got bubble
traders coming out of the woodwork, or someone seriously believes that sex is
overvalued relative to orange juice.  One derivatives trader says she's working on a
contract that will have a clearly deﬁned value in the event that aliens wipe out the
entire human species, but she says it's going to take a few hours and I say she's on
crack.  Indeed I believe an actual majority of the people still trying to trade in this
environment are higher than the heliopause.  Bid-ask spreads are so wide you could
kick a fucking football stadium through them, nothing is clearing, and I have
unisolated conditional dependencies coming out of my ass.  I have no fucking clue
what the market believes.  Someone get me a drink.'  Unquote."  Akon looked at the
Master of Fandom.  "Any suggestions get reddited up from the rest of the crew?"
The Master cleared his throat.  "My lord, we took the liberty of ﬁltering out everything
that was physically impossible, based on pure wishful thinking, or displayed a clear
misunderstanding of naturalistic metaethics.  I can show you the raw list, if you'd like."
"And what's left?" Akon said.  "Oh, never mind, I get it."
"Well, not quite," said the Master.  "To summarize the best ideas -"  He gestured a
small holo into existence.

Ask the Superhappies if their biotechnology is capable of in vivo cognitive
alterations of Babyeater children to ensure that they don't grow up wanting to
eat their own children.  Sterilize the current adults.  If Babyeater adults cannot
be sterilized and will not surrender, imprison them.  If that's too expensive, kill
most of them, but leave enough in prison to preserve their culture for the
children.  Oﬀer the Superhappies an alliance to invade the Babyeaters, in which
we provide the capital and labor and they provide the technology.
"Not too bad," Akon said.  His voice grew somewhat dry.  "But it doesn't seem to
address the question of what the Superhappies are supposed to do with us.  The
analogous treatment -"
"Yes, my lord," the Master said.  "That was extensively pointed out in the comments,
my lord.  And the other problem is that the Superhappies don't really need our labor
or our capital."  The Master looked in the direction of the Lord Programmer, the
Xenopsychologist, and the Lady Sensory.
The Lord Programmer said, "My lord, I believe the Superhappies think much faster
than we do.  If their cognitive systems are really based on something more like DNA
than like neurons, that shouldn't be surprising.  In fact, it's surprising that the speedup
is as little as -"  The Lord Programmer stopped, and swallowed.  "My lord.  The
Superhappies responded to most of our transmissions extremely quickly.  There was,
however, a ﬁnite delay.  And that delay was roughly proportional to the length of the
response, plus an additive constant.  Going by the proportion, my lord, I believe they
think between ﬁfteen and thirty times as fast as we do, to the extent such a
comparison can be made.  If I try to use Moore's Law type reasoning on some of the
observable technological parameters in their ship - Alderson ﬂux, power density, that
sort of thing - then I get a reasonably convergent estimate that the aliens are two
hundred years ahead of us in human-equivalent subjective time.  Which means it
would be twelve hundred equivalent years since their Scientiﬁc Revolution."
"If," the Xenopsychologist said, "their history went as slowly as ours.  It probably
didn't."  The Xenopsychologist took a breath.  "My lord, my suspicion is that the aliens
are literally able to run their entire ship using only three kiritsugu as sole crew.  My
lord, this may represent, not only the superior programming ability that translated
their communications to us, but also the highly probable case that Superhappies can
trade knowledge and skills among themselves by having sex.  Every individual of their
species might contain the memory of their Einsteins and Newtons and a thousand
other areas of expertise, no more conserved than DNA is conserved among humans. 
My lord, I suspect their version of Galileo was something like thirty objective years
ago, as the stars count time, and that they've been in space for maybe twenty years."
The Lady Sensory said, "Their ship has a plane of symmetry, and it's been getting
wider on the axis through that plane, as it sucks up nova dust and energy.  It's
growing on a smooth exponential at 2% per hour, which means it can split every
thirty-ﬁve hours in this environment."
"I have no idea," the Xenopsychologist said, "how fast the Superhappies can
reproduce themselves - how many children they have per generation, or how fast their
children sexually mature.  But all things considered, I don't think we can count on their
kids taking twenty years to get through high school."
There was silence.
When Akon could speak again, he said, "Are you all quite ﬁnished?"

"If they let us live," the Lord Programmer said, "and if we can work out a trade
agreement with them under Ricardo's Law of Comparative Advantage, interest rates
will -"
"Interest rates can fall into an open sewer and die.  Any further transmissions from the
Superhappy ship?"
The Lady Sensory shook her head.
"All right," Akon said.  "Open a transmission channel to them."
There was a stir around the table.  "My lord -" said the Master of Fandom.  "My lord,
what are you going to say?"
Akon smiled wearily.  "I'm going to ask them if they have any options to oﬀer us."
The Lady Sensory looked at the Ship's Confessor.  The hood silently nodded:  He's still
sane.
The Lady Sensory swallowed, and opened a channel.  On the holo there ﬁrst appeared,
as a screen:
The Lady 3rd Kiritsugu
    temporary co-chair of the Gameplayer
        Language Translator version 9
        Cultural Translator version 16
The Lady 3rd in this translation was slightly less pale, and looked a bit more
concerned and sympathetic.  She took in Akon's appearance at a glance, and her eyes
widened in alarm.  "My lord, you're hurting!"
"Just tired, milady," Akon said.  He cleared his throat.  "Our ship's decision-making
usually relies on markets and our markets are behaving erratically.  I'm sorry to inﬂict
that on you as shared pain, and I'll try to get this over with quickly.  Anyway -"
Out of the corner of his eye, Akon saw the Ship's Engineer re-enter the room; the
Engineer looked as if he had something to say, but froze when he saw the holo.
There was no time for that now.
"Anyway," Akon said, "we've worked out that the key decisions depend heavily on
your level of technology.  What do you think you can actually do with us or the
Babyeaters?"
The Lady 3rd sighed.  "I really should get your independent component before giving
you ours - you should at least think of it ﬁrst - but I suppose we're out of luck on that. 
How about if I just tell you what we're currently planning?"
Akon nodded.  "That would be much appreciated, milady."  Some of his muscles that
had been tense, started to relax.  Cultural Translator version 16 was a lot easier on his
brain.  Distantly, he wondered if some transformed avatar of himself was making
skillful love to the Lady 3rd -
"All right," the Lady 3rd said.  "We consider that the obvious starting point upon which
to build further negotiations, is to combine and compromise the utility functions of the
three species until we mutually satisﬁce, providing compensation for all changes

demanded.  The Babyeaters must compromise their values to eat their children at a
stage where they are not sentient - we might accomplish this most eﬀectively by
changing the lifecycle of the children themselves.  We can even give the unsentient
children an instinct to ﬂee and scream, and generate simple spoken objections, but
prevent their brain from developing self-awareness until after the hunt."
Akon straightened.  That actually sounded - quite compassionate - sort of -
"Our own two species," the Lady 3rd said, "which desire this change of the
Babyeaters, will compensate them by adopting Babyeater values, making our own
civilization of greater utility in their sight: we will both change to spawn additional
infants, and eat most of them at almost the last stage before they become sentient."
The Conference room was frozen.  No one moved.  Even their faces didn't change
expression.
Akon's mind suddenly ﬂashed back to those writhing, interpenetrating, visually painful
blobs he had seen before.
A cultural translator could change the image, but not the reality.
"It is nonetheless probable," continued the Lady 3rd, "that the Babyeaters will not
accept this change as it stands; it will be necessary to impose these changes by
force.  As for you, humankind, we hope you will be more reasonable.  But both your
species, and the Babyeaters, must relinquish bodily pain, embarrassment, and
romantic troubles.  In exchange, we will change our own values in the direction of
yours.  We are willing to change to desire pleasure obtained in more complex ways, so
long as the total amount of our pleasure does not signiﬁcantly decrease.  We will learn
to create art you ﬁnd pleasing.  We will acquire a sense of humor, though we will not
lie.  From the perspective of humankind and the Babyeaters, our civilization will obtain
much utility in your sight, which it did not previously possess.  This is the
compensation we oﬀer you.  We furthermore request that you accept from us the gift
of untranslatable 2, which we believe will enhance, on its own terms, the value that
you name 'love'.  This will also enable our kinds to have sex using mechanical aids,
which we greatly desire.  At the end of this procedure, all three species will satisﬁce
each other's values and possess great common ground, upon which we may create a
civilization together."
Akon slowly nodded.  It was all quite unbelievably civilized.  It might even be the
categorically best general procedure when worlds collided.
The Lady 3rd brightened.  "A nod - is that assent, humankind?"
"It's acknowledgment," Akon said.  "We'll have to think about this."
"I understand," the Lady 3rd said.  "Please think as swiftly as you can.  Babyeater
children are dying in horrible agony as you think."
"I understand," Akon said in return, and gestured to cut the transmission.
The holo blinked out.
There was a long, terrible silence.
"No."

The Lord Pilot said it.  Cold, ﬂat, absolute.
There was another silence.
"My lord," the Xenopsychologist said, very softly, as though afraid the messenger
would be torn apart and dismembered, "I do not think they were oﬀering us that
option."
"Actually," Akon said, "The Superhappies oﬀered us more than we were going to oﬀer
the Babyeaters.  We weren't exactly thinking about how to compensate them."  It was
strange, Akon noticed, his voice was very calm, maybe even deadly calm.  "The
Superhappies really are a very fair-minded people.  You get the impression they would
have proposed exactly the same solution whether or not they happened to hold the
upper hand.  We might have just enforced our own will on the Babyeaters and told the
Superhappies to take a hike.  If we'd held the upper hand.  But we don't.  And that's
that, I guess."
"No!" shouted the Lord Pilot.  "That's not -"
Akon looked at him, still with that deadly calm.
The Lord Pilot was breathing deeply, not as if quieting himself, but as if preparing for
battle on some ancient savanna plain that no longer existed.  "They want to turn us
into something inhuman.  It - it cannot - we cannot - we must not allow -"
"Either give us a better option or shut up," the Lord Programmer said ﬂatly.  "The
Superhappies are smarter than us, have a technological advantage, think faster, and
probably reproduce faster.  We have no hope of holding them oﬀ militarily.  If our ships
ﬂee, the Superhappies will simply follow in faster ships.  There's no way to shut a
starline once opened, and no way to conceal the fact that it is open -"
"Um," the Ship's Engineer said.
Every eye turned to him.
"Um," the Ship's Engineer said.  "My Lord Administrator, I must report to you in
private."
The Ship's Confessor shook his head.  "You could have handled that better, Engineer."
Akon nodded to himself.  It was true.  The Ship's Engineer had already betrayed the
fact that a secret existed.  Under the circumstances, easy to deduce that it had come
from the Babyeater data.  That was eighty percent of the secret right there.  And if it
was relevant to starline physics, that was half of the remainder.
"Engineer," Akon said, "since you have already revealed that a secret exists, I suggest
you tell the full Command Conference.  We need to stay in sync with each other.  Two
minds are not a committee.  We'll worry later about keeping the secret classiﬁed."
The Ship's Engineer hesitated.  "Um, my lord, I suggest that I report to you ﬁrst,
before you decide -"
"There's no time," Akon said.  He pointed to where the holo had been.
"Yes," the Master of Fandom said, "we can always slit our own throats afterward, if the
secret is that awful."  The Master of Fandom gave a small laugh -

- then stopped, at the look on the Engineer's face.
"At your will, my lord," the Engineer said.
He drew a deep breath.  "I asked the Lord Programmer to compare any identiﬁable
equations and constants in the Babyeater's scientiﬁc archive, to the analogous
scientiﬁc data of humanity.  Most of the identiﬁed analogues were equal, of course.  In
some places we have more precise values, as beﬁts our, um, superior technological
level.  But one anomaly did turn up: the Babyeater ﬁgure for Alderson's Coupling
Constant was ten orders of magnitude larger than our own."
The Lord Pilot whistled.  "Stars above, how did they manage to make that mistake -"
Then the Lord Pilot stopped abruptly.
"Alderson's Coupling Constant," Akon echoed.  "That's the... coupling between
Alderson interactions and the..."
"Between Alderson interactions and the nuclear strong force," the Lord Pilot said.  He
was beginning to smile, rather grimly.  "It was a free parameter in the standard model,
and so had to be established experimentally.  But because the interaction is so
incredibly... weak... they had to build an enormous Alderson generator to ﬁnd the
value.  The size of a very small moon, just to give us that one number.  Deﬁnitely not
something you could check at home.  That's the story in the physics textbooks, my
lords, my lady."
The Master of Fandom frowned.  "You're saying... the physicists faked the result in
order to... fund a huge project...?"  He looked puzzled.
"No," the Lord Pilot said.  "Not for the love of power.  Engineer, the Babyeater value
should be testable using our own ship's Alderson drive, if the coupling constant is that
strong.  This you have done?"
The Ship's Engineer nodded.  "The Babyeater value is correct, my lord."
The Ship's Engineer was pale.  The Lord Pilot was clenching his jaw into a sardonic
grin.
"Please explain," Akon said.  "Is the universe going to end in another billion years, or
something?  Because if so, the issue can wait -"
"My lord," the Ship's Confessor said, "suppose the laws of physics in our universe had
been such that the ancient Greeks could invent the equivalent of nuclear weapons
from materials just lying around.  Imagine the laws of physics had permitted a way to
destroy whole countries with no more diﬃculty than mixing gunpowder.  History would
have looked quite diﬀerent, would it not?"
Akon nodded, puzzled.  "Well, yes," Akon said.  "It would have been shorter."
"Aren't we lucky that physics didn't happen to turn out that way, my lord?  That in our
own time, the laws of physics don't permit cheap, irresistable superweapons?"
Akon furrowed his brow -
"But my lord," said the Ship's Confessor, "do we really know what we think we know? 
What diﬀerent evidence would we see, if things were otherwise?  After all - if you

happened to be a physicist, and you happened to notice an easy way to wreak
enormous destruction using oﬀ-the-shelf hardware - would you run out and tell you?"
"No," Akon said.  A sinking feeling was dawning in the pit of his stomach.  "You would
try to conceal the discovery, and create a cover story that discouraged anyone else
from looking there."
The Lord Pilot emitted a bark that was half laughter, and half something much darker. 
"It was perfect.  I'm a Lord Pilot and I never suspected until now."
"So?" Akon said.  "What is it, actually?"
"Um," the Ship's Engineer said.  "Well... basically... to skip over the technical details..."
The Ship's Engineer drew a breath.
"Any ship with a medium-sized Alderson drive can make a star go supernova."
Silence.
"Which might seem like bad news in general," the Lord Pilot said, "but from our
perspective, right here, right now, it's just what we need.  A mere nova wouldn't do it. 
But blowing up the whole star - "  He gave that bitter bark of laughter, again.  "No
star, no starlines.  We can make the main star of this system go supernova - not the
white dwarf, the companion.  And then the Superhappies won't be able to get to us. 
That is, they won't be able to get to the human starline network.  We will be dead.  If
you care about tiny irrelevant details like that."  The Lord Pilot looked around the
Conference Table.  "Do you care?  The correct answer is no, by the way."
"I care," the Lady Sensory said softly.  "I care a whole lot.  But..."  She folded her
hands atop the table and bowed her head.
There were nods from around the Table.
The Lord Pilot looked at the Ship's Engineer.  "How long will it take for you to modify
the ship's Alderson Drive -"
"It's done," said the Ship's Engineer.  "But... we should, um, wait until the
Superhappies are gone, so they don't detect us doing it."
The Lord Pilot nodded.  "Sounds like a plan.  Well, that's a relief.  And here I thought
the whole human race was doomed, instead of just us."  He looked inquiringly at
Akon.  "My lord?"
Akon rested his head in his hands, suddenly feeling more weary than he had ever felt
in his life.  From across the table, the Confessor watched him - or so it seemed; the
hood was turned in his direction, at any rate.
I told you so, the Confessor did not say.
"There is a certain problem with your plan," Akon said.
"Such as?" the Lord Pilot said.
"You've forgotten something," Akon said.  "Something terribly important.  Something
you once swore you would protect."

Puzzled faces looked at him.
"If you say something bloody ridiculous like 'the safety of the ship' -" said the Lord
Pilot.
The Lady Sensory gasped.  "Oh, no," she murmured.  "Oh, no.  The Babyeater
children."
The Lord Pilot looked like he had been punched in the stomach.  The grim smiles that
had begun to spread around the table were replaced with horror.
"Yes," Akon said.  He looked away from the Conference Table.  He didn't want to see
the reactions.  "The Superhappies wouldn't be able to get to us.  And they couldn't get
to the Babyeaters either.  Neither could we.  So the Babyeaters would go on eating
their own children indeﬁnitely.  And the children would go on dying over days in their
parents' stomachs.  Indeﬁnitely.  Is the human race worth that?"
Akon looked back at the Table, just once.  The Xenopsychologist looked sick, tears
were running down the Master's face, and the Lord Pilot looked like he were being
slowly torn in half.  The Lord Programmer looked abstracted, the Lady Sensory was
covering her face with her hands.  (And the Confessor's face still lay in shadow,
beneath the silver hood.)
Akon closed his eyes.  "The Superhappies will transform us into something not
human," Akon said.  "No, let's be frank.  Something less than human.  But not all that
much less than human.  We'll still have art, and stories, and love.  I've gone entire
hours without being in pain, and on the whole, it wasn't that bad an experience -"  The
words were sticking in his throat, along with a terrible fear.  "Well.  Anyway.  If
remaining whole is that important to us - we have the option.  It's just a question of
whether we're willing to pay the price.  Sacriﬁce the Babyeater children -"
They're a lot like human children, really.
"- to save humanity."
Someone in the darkness was screaming, a thin choked wail that sounded like nothing
Akon had ever heard or wanted to hear.  Akon thought it might be the Lord Pilot, or the
Master of Fandom, or maybe the Ship's Engineer.  He didn't open his eyes to ﬁnd out.
There was a chime.
"In-c-c-coming c-call from the Super Happy," the Lady Sensory spit out the words like
acid, "ship, my lord."
Akon opened his eyes, and felt, somehow, that he was still in darkness.
"Receive," Akon said.
The Lady 3rd Kiritsugu appeared before him.  Her eyes widened once, as she took in
his appearance, but she said nothing.
That's right, my lady, I don't look super happy.
"Humankind, we must have your answer," she said simply.

The Lord Administrator pinched the bridge of his nose, and rubbed his eyes.  Absurd,
that one human being should have to answer a question like that.  He wanted to foist
oﬀ the decision on a committee, a majority vote of the ship, a market - something that
wouldn't demand that anyone accept full responsibility.  But a ship run that way didn't
work well under ordinary circumstances, and there was no reason to think that things
would change under extraordinary circumstances.  He was an Administrator; he had to
accept all the advice, integrate it, and decide.  Experiment had shown that no
organizational structure of non-Administrators could match what he was trained to do,
and motivated to do; anything that worked was simply absorbed into the
Administrative weighting of advice.
Sole decision.  Sole responsibility if he got it wrong.  Absolute power and absolute
accountability, and never forget the second half, my lord, or you'll be ﬁred the
moment you get home.  Screw up indefensibly, my lord, and all your hundred and
twenty years of accumulated salary in escrow, producing that lovely steady income,
will vanish before you draw another breath.
Oh - and this time the whole human species will pay for it, too.
"I can't speak for all humankind," said the Lord Administrator.  "I can decide, but
others may decide diﬀerently.  Do you understand?"
The Lady 3rd made a light gesture, as if it were of no consequence.  "Are you an
exceptional case of a human decision-maker?"
Akon tilted his head.  "Not... particularly..."
"Then your decision is strongly indicative of what other human decisionmakers will
decide," she said.  "I ﬁnd it hard to imagine that the options exactly balance in your
decision mechanism, whatever your inability to admit your own preferences."
Akon slowly nodded.  "Then..."
He drew a breath.
Surely, any species that reached the stars would understand the Prisoner's Dilemma. 
If you couldn't cooperate, you'd just destroy your own stars.  A very easy thing to do,
as it had turned out.  By that standard, humanity might be something of an impostor
next to the Babyeaters and the Superhappies.  Humanity had kept it a secret from
itself.  The other two races - just managed not to do the stupid thing.  You wouldn't
meet anyone out among the stars, otherwise.
The Superhappies had done their very best to press C.  Cooperated as fairly as they
could.
Humanity could only do the same.
"For myself, I am inclined to accept your oﬀer."
He didn't look around to see how anyone had reacted to that.
"There may be other things," Akon added, "that humanity would like to ask of your
kind, when our representatives meet.  Your technology is advanced beyond ours."

The Lady 3rd smiled.  "We will, of course, be quite positively inclined toward any such
requests.  As I believe our ﬁrst message to you said - 'we love you and we want you to
be super happy'.  Your joy will be shared by us, and we will be pleasured together."
Akon couldn't bring himself to smile.  "Is that all?"
"This Babyeater ship," said the Lady 3rd, "the one that did not ﬁre on you, even
though they saw you ﬁrst.  Are you therefore allied with them?"
"What?" Akon said without thinking.  "No -"
"My lord!" shouted the Ship's Confessor -
Too late.
"My lord," the Lady Sensory said, her voice breaking, "the Superhappy ship has ﬁred
on the Babyeater vessel and destroyed it."
Akon stared at the Lady 3rd in horror.
"I'm sorry," the Lady 3rd Kiritsugu said.  "But our negotiations with them failed, as
predicted.  Our own ship owed them nothing and promised them nothing.  This will
make it considerably easier to sweep through their starline network when we return. 
Their children would be the ones to suﬀer from any delay.  You understand, my lord?"
"Yes," Akon said, his voice trembling.  "I understand, my lady kiritsugu."  He wanted to
protest, to scream out.  But the war was only beginning, and this - would admittedly
save -
"Will you warn them?" the Lady 3rd asked.
"No," Akon said.  It was the truth.
"Transforming the Babyeaters will take precedence over transforming your own
species.  We estimate the Babyeater operation may take several weeks of your time
to conclude.  We hope you do not mind waiting.  That is all," the Lady 3rd said.
And the holo faded.
"The Superhappy ship is moving out," the Lady Sensory said.  She was crying, silently,
as she steadily performed her duty of reporting.  "They're heading back toward their
starline origin."
"All right," Akon said.  "Take us home.  We need to report on the negotiations -"
There was an inarticulate scream, like that throat was trying to burst the walls of the
Conference chamber, as the Lord Pilot burst out of his chair, burst all restraints he had
placed on himself, and lunged forward.
But standing behind his target, unnoticed, the Ship's Confessor had produced from his
sleeve the tiny stunner - the weapon which he alone on the ship was authorized to
use, if he made a determination of outright mental breakdown.  With a sudden motion,
the Confessor's arm swept out...
1. ... and anesthetized the Lord Pilot.

2. ...  [This option will become the True Ending only if someone suggests it in the
comments before the previous ending is posted tomorrow.  Otherwise, the ﬁrst
ending is the True one.]

Normal Ending: Last Tears (6/8)
(Part 6 of 8 in "Three Worlds Collide")
Today was the day.
The streets of ancient Earth were crowded to overbursting with people looking up at
the sky, faces crowded up against windows.
Waiting for their sorrows to end.
Akon was looking down at their faces, from the balcony of a room in a well-guarded
hotel.  There were many who wished to initiate violence against him, which was
understandable.  Fear showed on most of the faces in the crowd, rage in some; a very
few were smiling, and Akon suspected they might have simply given up on holding
themselves together.  Akon wondered what his own face looked like, right now.
The streets were less crowded than they might have been, only a few weeks earlier.
No one had told the Superhappies about that part.  They'd sent an ambassadorial ship
"in case you have any urgent requests we can help with", arriving hard on the heels of
the Impossible.  That ship had not been given any of the encryption keys to the
human Net, nor allowed to land.  It had made the Superhappies extremely suspicious,
and the ambassadorial ship had disgorged a horde of tiny daughters to observe the
rest of the human starline network -
But if the Superhappies knew, they would have tried to stop it.  Somehow.
That was a price that no one was willing to include into the bargain, no matter what. 
There had to be that - alternative.
A quarter of the Impossible Possible World's crew had committed suicide, when the
pact and its price became known.  Others, Akon thought, had waited only to be with
their families.  The percentage on Earth... would probably be larger.  The government,
what was left of it, had refused to publish statistics.  All you saw was the bodies being
carried out of the apartments - in plain, unmarked boxes, in case the Superhappy ship
was using optical surveillance.
Akon swallowed.  The fear was already drying his own throat, the fear of changing, of
becoming something else that wasn't quite him.  He understood the urge to end that
fear, at any price.  And yet at the same time, he didn't, couldn't understand the
suicides.  Was being dead a smaller change?  To die was not to leave the world, not to
escape somewhere else; it was the simultaneous change of every piece of yourself
into nothing.
Many parents had made that choice for their children.  The government had tried to
stop it.  The Superhappies weren't going to like it, when they found out.  And it wasn't
right, when the children themselves wouldn't be so afraid of a world without pain.  It
wasn't as if the parents and children were going somewhere together.  The
government had done its best, issued orders, threatened conﬁscations - but there was
only so much you could do to coerce someone who was going to die anyway.
So more often than not, they carried away the mother's body with her daughter's, the
father with the son.

The survivors, Akon knew, would regret that far more vehemently, once they were
closer to the Superhappy point of view.
Just as they would regret not eating the tiny bodies of the infants.
A hiss went up from the crowd, the intake of a thousand breaths.  Akon looked up, and
he saw in the sky the cloud of ships, dispersing from the direction of the Sun and the
Huygens starline.  Even at this distance they twinkled faintly.  Akon guessed - and as
one ship grew closer, he knew that he was right - that the Superhappy ships were no
longer things of pulsating ugliness, but gently shifting iridescent crystal, designs that
both a human and a Babyeater would ﬁnd beautiful.  The Superhappies had been swift
to follow through on their own part of the bargain.  Their new aesthetic senses would
already be an intersection of three worlds' tastes.
The ship drew closer, overhead.  It was quieter in the air than even the most eﬃcient
human ships, twinkling brightly and silently; the way that someone might imagine a
star in the night sky would look close up, if they had no idea of the truth.
The ship stopped, hovering above the roads, between the buildings.
Other bright ships, still searching for their destinations, slid by overhead like shooting
stars.
Long, graceful iridescent tendrils extended from the ship, down toward the crowd. 
One of them came toward his own balcony, and Akon saw that it was marked with the
curves of a door.
The crowd didn't break, didn't run, didn't panic.  The screams failed to spread, as the
strong hugged the weak and comforted them.  That was something to be proud of, in
the last moments of the old humanity.
The tendril reaching for Akon halted just before him.  The door marked at its end
dilated open.
And wasn't it strange, now, the crowd was looking up at him.
Akon took a deep breath.  He was afraid, but -
There wasn't much point in standing here, going on being afraid, experiencing futile
disutility.
He stepped through the door, into a neat and well-lighted transparent capsule.
The door slid shut again.
Without a lurch, without a sound, the capsule moved up toward the alien ship.
One last time, Akon thought of all his fear, of the sick feeling in his stomach and the
burning that was becoming a pain in his throat.  He pinched himself on the arm, hard,
very hard, and felt the warning signal telling him to stop.
Goodbye, Akon thought; and the tears began falling down his cheek, as though that
one silent word had, for the very last time, broken his heart.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And he lived happily ever after.

True Ending: Sacriﬁcial Fire (7/8)
(Part 7 of 8 in "Three Worlds Collide")
Standing behind his target, unnoticed, the Ship's Confessor had produced from his
sleeve the tiny stunner - the weapon which he alone on the ship was authorized to
use, if he made a determination of outright mental breakdown. With a sudden motion,
his arm swept outward -
- and anesthetized the Lord Akon.
Akon crumpled almost instantly, as though most of his strings had already been cut,
and only a few last strands had been holding his limbs in place.
Fear, shock, dismay, sheer outright surprise: that was the Command Conference
staring aghast at the Confessor.
From the hood came words absolutely forbidden to originate from that shadow: the
voice of command. "Lord Pilot, take us through the starline back to the Huygens
system. Get us moving now, you are on the critical path. Lady Sensory, I need you to
enforce an absolute lockdown on all of this ship's communication systems except for a
single channel under your direct control. Master of Fandom, get me proxies on the
assets of every being on this ship. We are going to need capital."
For a moment, the Command Conference was frozen, voiceless and motionless, as
everyone waited for someone else do to something.
And then -
"Moving the Impossible now, my lord," said the Lord Pilot. His face was sane once
again. "What's your plan?"
"He is not your lord!" cried the Master of Fandom. Then his voice dropped. "Excuse
me. Confessor - it did not appear to me that our Lord Administrator was insane. And
you, of all people, cannot just seize power -"
"True," said the one, "Akon was sane. But he was also an honest man who would keep
his word once he gave it, and that I could not allow. As for me - I have betrayed my
calling three times over, and am no longer a Confessor." With that same response, the
once-Confessor swept back the hood -
At any other time, the words and the move and the revealed face would have
provoked shock to the point of fainting. On this day, with the whole human species at
stake, it seemed merely interesting. Chaos had already run loose, madness was
already unleashed into the world, and a little more seemed of little consequence.
"Ancestor," said the Master, "you are twice prohibited from exercising any power
here."
The former Confessor smiled dryly. "Rules like that only exist within our own minds,
you know. Besides," he added, "I am not steering the future of humanity in any real
sense, just stepping in front of a bullet. That is not even advice, let alone an order.

And it is... appropriate... that I, and not any of you, be the one who orders this thing
done -"
"Fuck that up the ass with a hedge trimmer," said the Lord Pilot. "Are we going to save
the human species or not?"
There was a pause while the others ﬁgured out the correct answer.
Then the Master sighed, and inclined his head in assent to the once-Confessor. "I shall
follow your orders... kiritsugu."
Even the Kiritsugu ﬂinched at that, but there was work to be done, and not much time
in which to do it.
In the Huygens system, the Impossible Possible World was observed to return from its
much-heralded expedition, appearing on the starline that had shown the
unprecedented anomaly. Instantly, without a clock tick's delay, the Impossible
broadcast a market order.
That was already a dozen ways illegal. If the Impossible had made a scientiﬁc
discovery, it should have broadcast the experimental results openly before attempting
to trade on them. Otherwise the result was not proﬁt but chaos, as traders throughout
the market refused to deal with you; just conditioning on the fact that you wanted to
sell or buy from them, was reason enough for them not to. The whole market seized
up as hedgers tried to guess what the hidden experimental results could have been,
and which of their counterparties had private information.
The Impossible ignored the rules. It broadcast the speciﬁcation of a new prediction
contract, signed with EMERGENCY OVERRIDE and IMMINENT HARM and CONFESSOR
FLAG - signatures that carried extreme penalties, up to total conﬁscation, for misuse;
but any one of which ensured that the contract would appear on the prediction
markets at almost the speed of the raw signal.
The Impossible placed an initial order on the contract backed by nearly the entire
asset base of its crew.
The prediction's plaintext read:
In three hours and forty-one minutes, the starline between Huygens and Earth will
become impassable.
Within thirty minutes after, every human being remaining in this solar system will
die.
All passage through this solar system will be permanently denied to humans
thereafter.
(The following plaintext is not intended to describe the contract's terms, but
justiﬁes why a probability estimate on the underlying proposition is of great social
utility:
ALIENS. ANYONE WITH A STARSHIP, FILL IT WITH CHILDREN AND GO! GET OUT OF
HUYGENS, NOW!)
In the Huygens system, there was almost enough time to draw a single breath.

And then the markets went mad, as every single trader tried to calculate the odds,
and every married trader abandoned their positions and tried to get their children to a
starport.
"Six," murmured the Master of Fandom, "seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven -"
A holo appeared within the Command Conference, a signal from the President of the
Huygens Central Clearinghouse, requesting (or perhaps "demanding" would have
been a better word) an interview with the Lord Administrator of the Impossible
Possible World.
"Put it through," said the Lord Pilot, now sitting in Akon's chair as the ﬁgurehead
anointed by the Kiritsugu.
"Aliens?" the President demanded, and then her eye caught the Pilot's uniform.
"You're not an Administrator -"
"Our Lord Administrator is under sedation," said the Kiritsugu beside; he was wearing
his Confessor's hood again, to save on explanations. "He placed himself under more
stress than any of us -"
The President made an abrupt cutting gesture. "Explain this - contract. And if this is a
market manipulation scheme, I'll see you all tickled until the last sun grows cold!"
"We followed the starline that showed the anomalous behavior," the Lord Pilot said,
"and found that a nova had just occurred in the originating system. In other words, my
Lady President, it was a direct eﬀect of the nova and thus occurred on all starlines
leading out of that system. We've never found aliens before now - but that's reﬂective
of the probability of any single system we explore having been colonized. There might
even be a starline leading out of this system that leads to an alien domain - but we
have no way of knowing which one, and opening a new starline is expensive. The nova
acted as a common rendezvous signal, my Lady President. It reﬂects the probability,
not that we and the aliens encounter each other by direct exploration, but the
probability that we have at least one neighboring world in common."
The President was pale. "And the aliens are hostile."
The Lord Pilot involuntarily looked to the Kiritsugu.
"Our values are incompatible," said the Kiritsugu.
"Yes, that's one way of putting it," said the Lord Pilot. "And unfortunately, my Lady
President, their technology is considerably in advance of ours."
"Lord... Pilot," the President said, "are you certain that the aliens intend to wipe out
the human species?"
The Lord Pilot gave a very thin, very ﬂat smile. "Incompatible values, my Lady
President. They're quite skilled with biotechnology. Let's leave it at that."
Sweat was running down the President's forehead. "And why did they let you go,
then?"
"We arranged for them to be told a plausible lie," the Lord Pilot said simply. "One of
the reasons they're more advanced than us is that they're not very good at

deception."
"None of this," the President said, and now her voice was trembling, "none of this
explains why the starline between Huygens and Earth will become impassable. Surely,
if what you say is true, the aliens will pour through our world, and into Earth, and into
the human starline network. Why do you think that this one starline will luckily shut
down?"
The Lord Pilot drew a breath. It was good form to tell the exact truth when you had
something to hide. "My Lady President, we encountered two alien species at the nova.
The ﬁrst species exchanged scientiﬁc information with us. It is the second species that
we are running from. But, from the ﬁrst species, we learned a fact which this ship can
use to shut down the Earth starline. For obvious reasons, my Lady President, we do
not intend to share this fact publicly. That portion of our ﬁnal report will be encrypted
to the Chair of the Interstellar Association for the Advancement of Science, and to no
other key."
The President started laughing. It was wild, hysterical laughter that caused the
Kiritsugu's hood to turn toward her. From the corner of the screen, a gloved hand
entered the view; the hand of the President's own Confessor. "My lady..." came a soft
female voice.
"Oh, very good," the President said. "Oh, marvelous. So it's your ship that's going to
be responsible for this catastrophe. You admit that, eh? I'm amazed. You probably
managed to avoid telling a single direct lie. You plan to blow up our star and kill ﬁfteen
billion people, and you're trying to stick to the literal truth."
The Lord Pilot slowly nodded. "When we compared the ﬁrst aliens' scientiﬁc database
to our own -"
"No, don't tell me. I was told it could be done by a single ship, but I'm not supposed to
know how. Astounding that an alien species could be so peaceful they don't even
consider that a secret. I think I would like to meet these aliens. They sound much nicer
than the other ones - why are you laughing?"
"My Lady President," the Lord Pilot said, getting a grip on himself, "forgive me, we've
been through a lot. Excuse me for asking, but are you evacuating the planet or what?"
The President's gaze suddenly seemed sharp and piercing like the ﬁre of stars. "It was
set in motion instantly, of course. No comparable harm done, if you're wrong. But
three hours and forty-one minutes is not enough time to evacuate ten percent of this
planet's children." The President's eyes darted at something out of sight. "With eight
hours, we could call in ships from the Earth nexus and evacuate the whole planet."
"My lady," a soft voice came from behind the President, "it is the whole human species
at stake. Not just the entire starline network beyond Earth, but the entire future of
humanity. Any incrementally higher probability of the aliens arriving within that time -"
The President stood in a single ﬂuid motion that overturned her chair, moving so fast
that the viewpoint bobbed as it tried to focus on her and the shadow-hooded ﬁgure
standing beside. "Are you telling me," she said, and her voice rose to a scream, "to
shut up and multiply?"
"Yes."

The President turned back to the camera angle, and said simply, "No. You don't know
the aliens are following that close behind you - do you? We don't even know if you can
shut down the starline! No matter what your theory predicts, it's never been tested -
right? What if you create a ﬂare bright enough to roast our planet, but not explode the
whole sun? Billions would die, for nothing! So if you do not promise me a minimum of -
let's call it nine hours to ﬁnish evacuating this planet - then I will order your ship
destroyed before it can act."
No one from the Impossible spoke.
The President's ﬁst slammed her desk. "Do you understand me? Answer! Or in the
name of Huygens, I will destroy your ship -"
Her Confessor caught her President's body, very gently supporting it as it collapsed.
Even the Lord Pilot was pale and silent. But that, at least, had been within law and
tradition; no one could have called that thinking sane.
On the display, the Confessor bowed her hood. "I will inform the markets that the Lady
President was driven unstable by your news," she said quietly, "and recommend to the
government that they carry out the evacuation without asking further questions of
your ship. Is there anything else you wish me to tell them?" Her hood turned slightly,
toward the Kiritsugu. "Or tell me?"
There was a strange, quick pause, as the shadows from within the two hoods stared at
each other.
Then: "No," replied the Kiritsugu. "I think it has all been said."
The Confessor's hood nodded. "Goodbye."
"There it goes," the Ship's Engineer said. "We have a complete, stable positive
feedback loop."
On screen was the majesty that was the star Huygens, of the inhabited planet
Huygens IV. Overlaid in false color was the recirculating loop of Alderson forces which
the Impossible had steadily fed.
Fusion was now increasing in the star, as the Alderson forces encouraged nuclear
barriers to break down; and the more fusions occurred, the more Alderson force was
generated. Round and round it went. All the work of the Impossible, the full frantic
output of their stardrive, had only served to subtly steer the vast forces being
generated; nudge a fraction into a circle rather than a line. But now -
Did the star brighten? It was only their imagination, they knew. Photons take centuries
to exit a sun, under normal circumstances. The star's core was trying to expand, but it
was expanding too slowly - all too slowly - to outrun the positive feedback that had
begun.
"Multiplication factor one point oh ﬁve," the Engineer said. "It's climbing faster now,
and the loop seems to be intact. I think we can conclude that this operation is going to
be... successful. One point two."
"Starline instability detected," the Lady Sensory said.

Ships were still disappearing in frantic waves on the starline toward Earth. Still
connected to the Huygens civilization, up to the last moment, by tiny threads of
Alderson force.
"Um, if anyone has anything they want to add to our ﬁnal report," the Ship's Engineer
said, "they've got around ten seconds."
"Tell the human species from me -" the Lord Pilot said.
"Five seconds."
The Lord Pilot shouted, ﬁst held high and triumphant: "To live, and occasionally be
unhappy!"
This concludes the full and ﬁnal report of the Impossible Possible World.
(To be completed.)

Epilogue: Atonement (8/8)
(Part 8 of 8 in "Three Worlds Collide")
Fire came to Huygens.
The star erupted.
Stranded ships, ﬁlled with children doomed by a second's last delay, still milled
around the former Earth transit point.  Too many doomed ships, far too many doomed
ships.  They should have left a minute early, just to be sure; but the temptation to
load in that one last child must have been irresistable.  To do the warm and fuzzy
thing just this one time, instead of being cold and calculating.  You couldn't blame
them, could you...?
Yes, actually, you could.
The Lady Sensory switched oﬀ the display.  It was too painful.
On the Huygens market, the price of a certain contract spiked to 100%.  They were all
rich in completely worthless assets for the next nine minutes, until the supernova
blast front arrived.
"So," the Lord Pilot ﬁnally said.  "What kind of asset retains its value in a market with
nine minutes to live?"
"Booze for immediate delivery," the Master of Fandom said promptly.  "That's what
you call a -"
"Liquidity preference," the others chorused.
The Master laughed.  "All right, that was too obvious.  Well... chocolate, sex -"
"Not necessarily," said the Lord Pilot.  "If you can use up the whole supply of chocolate
at once, does demand outstrip supply?  Same with sex - the value could actually drop
if everyone's suddenly willing.  Not to mention:  Nine minutes?"
"All right then, expert oral sex from experienced providers.  And hard drugs with
dangerous side eﬀects; the demand would rise hugely relative to supply -"
"This is inane," the Ship's Engineer commented.
The Master of Fandom shrugged.  "What do you say in the unrecorded last minutes of
your life that is not inane?"
"It doesn't matter," said the Lady Sensory.  Her face was strangely tranquil.  "Nothing
that we do now matters.  We won't have to live with the consequences.  No one will. 
All this time will be obliterated when the blast front hits.  The role I've always played,
the picture that I have of me... it doesn't matter.  There's... a peace... in not having to
be Dalia Ancromein any more."
The others looked at her.  Talk about killing the mood.

"Well," the Master of Fandom said, "since you raise the subject, I suppose it would be
peaceful if not for the screaming terror."
"You don't have to feel the screaming terror," the Lady Sensory said.  "That's just a
picture you have in your head of how it should be.  The role of someone facing
imminent death.  But I don't have to play any more roles.  I don't have to feel
screaming terror.  I don't have to frantically pack in a few last moments of fun.  There
are no more obligations."
"Ah," the Master of Fandom said, "so I guess this is when we ﬁnd out who we really
are."  He paused for a moment, then shrugged.  "I don't seem to be anyone in
particular.  Oh well."
The Lady Sensory stood up, and walked across the room to where the Lord Pilot stood
looking at the viewscreen.
"My Lord Pilot," the Lady Sensory said.
"Yes?" the Lord Pilot said.  His face was expectant.
The Lady Sensory smiled.  It was bizarre, but not frightening.  "Do you know, my Lord
Pilot, that I had often thought how wonderful it would be to kick you very hard in the
testicles?"
"Um," the Lord Pilot said.  His arms and legs suddenly tensed, preparing to block.
"But now that I could do it," the Lady Sensory said, "I ﬁnd that I don't really want to.  It
seems... that I'm not as awful a person as I thought."  She gave a brief sigh.  "I wish
that I had realized it earlier."
The Lord Pilot's hand swiftly darted out and groped the Lady Sensory's breast.  It was
so unexpected that no one had time to react, least of all her.  "Well, what do you
know," the Pilot said, "I'm just as much of a pervert as I thought.  My self-estimate was
more accurate than yours, nyah nyah -"
The Lady Sensory kneed him in the groin, hard enough to drop him moaning to the
ﬂoor, but not hard enough to require medical attention.
"Okay," the Master of Fandom said, "can we please not go down this road?  I'd like to
die with at least some dignity."
There was a long, awkward silence, broken only by a quiet "Ow ow ow ow..."
"Would you like to hear something amusing?" asked the Kiritsugu, who had once been
a Confessor.
"If you're going to ask that question," said the Master of Fandom, "when the answer is
obviously yes, thus wasting a few more seconds -"
"Back in the ancient days that none of you can imagine, when I was seventeen years
old - which was underage even then - I stalked an underage girl through the streets,
slashed her with a knife until she couldn't stand up, and then had sex with her before
she died.  It was probably even worse than you're imagining.  And deep down, in my
very core, I enjoyed every minute."
Silence.

"I don't think of it often, mind you.  It's been a long time, and I've taken a lot of
intelligence-enhancing drugs since then.  But still - I was just thinking that maybe
what I'm doing now ﬁnally makes up for that."
"Um," said the Ship's Engineer.  "What we just did, in fact, was kill ﬁfteen billion
people."
"Yes," said the Kiritsugu, "that's the amusing part."
Silence.
"It seems to me," mused the Master of Fandom, "that I should feel a lot worse about
that than I actually do."
"We're in shock," the Lady Sensory observed distantly.  "It'll hit us in about half an
hour, I expect."
"I think it's starting to hit me," the Ship's Engineer said.  His face was twisted.  "I - I
was so worried I wouldn't be able to destroy my home planet, that I didn't get around
to feeling unhappy about succeeding until now.  It... hurts."
"I'm mostly just numb," the Lord Pilot said from the ﬂoor.  "Well, except down there,
unfortunately."  He slowly sat up, wincing.  "But there was this absolute unalterable
thing inside me, screaming so loud that it overrode everything.  I never knew there
was a place like that within me.  There wasn't room for anything else until humanity
was safe.  And now my brain is worn out.  So I'm just numb."
"Once upon a time," said the Kiritsugu, "there were people who dropped a U-235
ﬁssion bomb, on a place called Hiroshima.  They killed perhaps seventy thousand
people, and ended a war.  And if the good and decent oﬃcer who pressed that button
had needed to walk up to a man, a woman, a child, and slit their throats one at a time,
he would have broken long before he killed seventy thousand people."
Someone made a choking noise, as if trying to cough out something that had
suddenly lodged deep in their throat.
"But pressing a button is diﬀerent," the Kiritsugu said.  "You don't see the results,
then.  Stabbing someone with a knife has an impact on you.  The ﬁrst time, anyway. 
Shooting someone with a gun is easier.  Being a few meters further away makes a
surprising diﬀerence.  Only needing to pull a trigger changes it a lot.  As for pressing a
button on a spaceship - that's the easiest of all.  Then the part about 'ﬁfteen billion'
just gets ﬂushed away.  And more importantly - you think it was the right thing to do. 
The noble, the moral, the honorable thing to do.  For the safety of your tribe.  You're
proud of it -"
"Are you saying," the Lord Pilot said, "that it was not the right thing to do?"
"No," the Kiritsugu said.  "I'm saying that, right or wrong, the belief is all it takes."
"I see," said the Master of Fandom.  "So you can kill billions of people without feeling
much, so long as you do it by pressing a button, and you're sure it's the right thing to
do.  That's human nature."  The Master of Fandom nodded.  "What a valuable and
important lesson.  I shall remember it all the rest of my life."
"Why are you saying all these things?" the Lord Pilot asked the Kiritsugu.

The Kiritsugu shrugged.  "When I have no reason left to do anything, I am someone
who tells the truth."
"It's wrong," said the Ship's Engineer in a small, hoarse voice, "I know it's wrong, but -
I keep wishing the supernova would hurry up and get here."
"There's no reason for you to hurt," said the Lady Sensory in a strange calm voice. 
"Just ask the Kiritsugu to stun you.  You'll never wake up."
"...no."
"Why not?" asked the Lady Sensory, in a tone of purely abstract curiosity.
The Ship's Engineer clenched his hands into ﬁsts.  "Because if hurting is that much of
a crime, then the Superhappies are right."  He looked at the Lady Sensory.  "You're
wrong, my lady.  These moments are as real as every other moment of our lives.  The
supernova can't make them not exist."  His voice lowered.  "That's what my cortex
says.  My diencephalon wishes we'd been closer to the sun."
"It could be worse," observed the Lord Pilot.  "You could not hurt."
"For myself," the Kiritsugu said quietly, "I had already visualized and accepted this,
and then it was just a question of watching it play out."  He sighed.  "The most
dangerous truth a Confessor knows is that the rules of society are just consensual
hallucinations.  Choosing to wake up from the dream means choosing to end your life. 
I knew that when I stunned Akon, even apart from the supernova."
"Okay, look," said the Master of Fandom, "call me a gloomy moomy, but does anyone
have something uplifting to say?"
The Lord Pilot jerked a thumb at the expanding supernova blast front, a hundred
seconds away.  "What, about that?"
"Yeah," the Master of Fandom said.  "I'd like to end my life on an up note."
"We saved the human species," oﬀered the Lord Pilot.  "Man, that's the sort of thing
you could just repeat to yourself over and over and over again -"
"Besides that."
"Besides WHAT?"
The Master managed to hold a straight face for a few seconds, and then had to laugh.
"You know," the Kiritsugu said, "I don't think there's anyone in modern-day humanity,
who would regard my past self as anything but a poor, abused victim.  I'm pretty sure
my mother drank during pregnancy, which, back then, would give your child
something called Fetal Alcohol Syndrome.  I was poor, uneducated, and in an
environment so entrepreneurially hostile you can't even imagine it -"
"This is not sounding uplifting," the Master said.
"But somehow," the Kiritsugu said, "all those wonderful excuses - I could never quite
believe in them myself, afterward.  Maybe because I'd also thought of some of the
same excuses before.  It's the part about not doing anything that got to me.  Others
fought the war to save the world, far over my head.  Lightning ﬂickering in the clouds

high above me, while I hid in the basement and suﬀered out the storm.  And by the
time I was rescued and healed and educated, in any shape to help others - the battle
was essentially over.  Knowing that I'd been a victim for someone else to save, one
more point in someone else's high score - that just stuck in my craw, all those years..."
"...anyway," the Kiritsugu said, and there was a small, slight smile on that ancient
face, "I feel better now."
"So does that mean," asked the Master, "that now your life is ﬁnally complete, and
you can die without any regrets?"
The Kiritsugu looked startled for a moment.  Then he threw back his head and
laughed.  True, pure, honest laughter.  The others began to laugh as well, and their
shared hilarity echoed across the room, as the supernova blast front approached at
almost exactly the speed of light.
Finally the Kiritsugu stopped laughing, and said:
"Don't be ridicu-"
 
 
 
 
 
 

