
Using Credence Calibration for Everything
1. Prediction-based medicine (PBM)
2. Preventing overcharging by prosecutors
3. Prediction-based-Medicine instead of E̵v̵i̵d̵e̵n̵c̵e̵ ̵b̵a̵s̵e̵d̵ ̵M̵e̵d̵i̵c̵i̵n̵e̵ Authority-based-
Medicine

Prediction-based medicine (PBM)
We need a new paradigm for doing medicine. I make the case by ﬁrst speaking about
the problems of our current paradigm of evidence-based medicine.
The status quo of evidence-based medicine
While biology moves forward and the cost of genetic-sequencing dropped a lot faster
than Moore's law the opposite is true for the development of new drugs. In the current
status quo the development of new drugs rises exponentially with Eroom's law. While
average lifespan increased greatly about the last century in Canada the average life
span at age 90 increased only 1.9 years over the last century. In 2008 the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention reported that life expectancy in the US declined from
77.9 to 77.8 years. After Worldbank data Germany increased average lifespan by two
years over the last decade which is not enough for the dream of radical lifespan
increases in our lifetime.
When it costs 80 million to test whether an intervention works and most attempts
show that the intervention doesn't work we have a problem. We end up paying billions
for every new intervention.
Eric Ries wrote "The Lean Startup". In it he argues that it's the job of a startup to
produce validated learning. He proposes that companies that work with small batch
sizes can produce more innovation because they can learn faster how to build good
products. The existing process in medicine doesn't allow for small batch innovation
because the measuring stick for whether an intervention works is too expensive.
In addition the evidence-based approach rests on the assumption that we don't build
bespoke interventions for every client. As long as a treatment doesn't generalize
about multiple diﬀerent patients, it's not possible to test it with a trial. In principle a
double-blind trial can't give you evidence that a bespoke intervention that targets the
speciﬁc DNA proﬁle of a patient and his co-morbidity works.
The ideal of prediction-based medicine
The evidence-based approach also assumes that practitioners are exchangeable. It
doesn't model the fact that diﬀerent physical therapist or psychologists have diﬀerent
skill levels. It doesn't provide a mechanism to reward highly skilled practitioners but it
treats every practitioner that uses the same treatment intervention the same way.
Its strong focus on asking whether a treatment beats a placebo in double-blind studies
makes it hard to compare diﬀerent treatments against each other. In the absence of
an ability to predict the eﬀect sizes of diﬀerent drugs with the literature the treatment
that wins on the market is often the treatment that's best promoted by a
pharmaceutical company.
How could a diﬀerent system work? What's the alternative to making treatment
decisions based on big and expensive studies that provide evidence?

I propose that a treatment provider should provide a patient with the credence that
the treatment provider estimates for treatment outcomes that are of interest to the
client.
If Bob wants to stop smoking and asks doctor Alice whether the treatment Alice
provides will result in Bob not smoking in a year, Alice should provide him with her
credence estimation. In addition Alice's credence estimations can be entered in a
central database. This allows Bob to see Alice's Brier score that reﬂects the ability of
Alice to predict the eﬀects of her treatment recommendations.
In this framework Alice's expertise isn't backed up by having gotten an academic
degree and recommending interventions that are studied with expensive gold-
standard studies. Her expertise is backed by her track record.
This means that Alice can charge money based on the quality of her skills. If Alice is
extremely good she can make a lot of money with her intervention without having to
pay billions for running trials.
Why don't we pay doctors in the present system based on their skills? We can't
measure their skills in the present paradigm, because we can't easily compare the
outcomes of diﬀerent doctors. Hard patients get send to doctors with good reputations
and as a result every doctor has an excuse for getting bad outcomes. In the status
quo he can just assert that his patients were hard.
In prediction-based medicine a doctor can write down a higher credence for a positive
treatment outcome for an easy patient than a hard patient. Patients can ask multiple
doctors and are given good data to choose the treatment that provides the best
outcome for which they are willing to pay.
In addition to giving the patient a more informed choice about the advantages of
diﬀerent treatment options this process helps the treatment provider to increase his
skills. They learn about where they make errors in the estimation of treatment
outcomes.
The provider can also innovate new treatments in small batches. Whenever he
understands a treatment well enough to make predictions about its outcomes he's in
business. He can easily iterate on his treatment and improve it.
The way to bring prediction-based medicine
into reality
I don't propose to get rid of evidence-based medicine. It has its place and I don't have
any problem with it for the cases where it works well.
It works quite poorly for body work interventions and psychological interventions that
are highly skill based. I have seen hypnosis achieve great eﬀects but at the same time
there are also many hypnotists who don't achieve great eﬀects. In the status quo a
patient who seeks hypnosis treatment has no eﬀective way to judge the quality of the
treatment before he's buying.
A minimal viable product might be a website that's Uber for body workers and
hypnotists. The website lists the treatment providers. The patient can enter his issue

and every treatment provider can oﬀer his credence of solving the issue of the patient
and the price of his treatment.
Before getting shown the treatment providers, a prospective patient would take a
standardized test to diagnose the illness. The information from the standardized test
will allow the treatment providers make better predictions about the likelihood that
they can cure the patient. Other standardized tests that aren't disease speciﬁc like the
OCEAN personality index can also be provided to the patient.
Following the ideas of David Burn's TEAM framework, the treatment provider can also
tell the patient to take tests between treatments sessions to keep better track of the
progression of the patient.
When making the purchasing decision the patient agrees to a contract that includes
him paying a ﬁne, if he doesn't report the treatment outcome after 3 months, 6
months and 1 year. This produces a comprehensive database of claims that allows us
to measure how well the treatment providers are calibrated. 
Various Quantiﬁed Self gadgets can be used to gather data. Many countries have
centralized electronic health records that could be linked to a user account.
The startup has a clear business model. It can take a cut of every transaction. It has
strong network eﬀects and it's harder for a treatment provider to switch because all
his prediction track record is hosted on the website.
Thanks to various people from the Berlin Lesswrong crowd who gave valuable
feedback for the draft of this article.

Preventing overcharging by
prosecutors
In criminal cases in the United States prosecutors often add a lot of charges for a
defendant to have ammunition for coercing the defendant into a plea deal. This is
toxic because the defendant doesn't know which of those charges are likely to hold up
in court if the case would be decided by a jury. Given that there's little cost to the
prosecutor for adding additional charges, defendants are often overcharged.
I propose that whenever a prosecutor ﬁles a charge for a defendant, the prosecutor
should state the likelihood that in the absence of a deal the court will ﬁnd the
defendant guilty of the charge. The ability of the prosecutor to accurately access the
likelihood can be measured via the Briers score or a Log score.
The current score should be publicly accessible on the website of the court. This
allows the defendant to know whether they can trust the likelihood values the
prosecutor gives. The score should also be printed on ballots when the prosecutor
seeks reelection to create much higher incentives for the prosecutor to give the
correct likelihood then convicting a lot of people.
After the prosecutor provides the likelihood for the charges it's much easier for a
defendant to make a good decision about whether taken a given plea deal is in their
interest. Prosecutors with a good Briers score will be able to make more plea deals to
reduce their overall workload because it's easier for the defendant to know that a deal
is in their interest.
While this reform wouldn't ﬁx all problems with plea deals, as some plea deals are due
to the defendant being given charges that would actually hold up in court given the
existing criminal code, the reform will provide defendants with fairer plea deals.
Defendants getting fair plea deals is good for the system given that it keeps overall
legal costs down.
I would expect that many juries will automatically throw out a 10% or 20% charges
because there will be people on the jury who would argue that the prosecutor thinking
that there's only a 20% chance that a charge holds means that there's reasonable
doubt against the charge.
This reform is both in the interests of citizens who care about law and order and
citizens who care about reducing sentencing overall as everybody should be
interested in prosecutors providing fair plea deals.

Prediction-based-Medicine instead of
E̵v̵i̵d̵e̵n̵c̵e̵ ̵b̵a̵s̵e̵d̵ ̵M̵e̵d̵i̵c̵i̵n̵e̵ Authority-
based-Medicine
This article explores how evidence-based Medicine currently works in 2021 with
ivermectin as a case study. I don't make any argument for or against ivermectin but
look at the deeper issues about how we decide which drug and expert to trust. First I
explore the status quo and then I will present Prediction-based Medicine as an
alternative to the status quo.
The idea of Evidence based Medicine
In the last three decades the idea of Evidence-based Medicine arose. A large part of
what Evidence-based Medicine is about is doctors reading the medical literature and
making treatment decisions based on the evidence available in the literature.
There's no study that showed any beneﬁt of doctors reading the medical literature, so
instead of providing evidence that Evidence-based Medicine works based on the
standards of evidence that Evidence based Medicine proposed, the framework gets
accepted without empiric evidence and is only backed up by intellectual arguments.
For a long-time that wasn't a real problem and everybody more or less agreed on what
the dogma of Evidence based Medicine is supposed to mean.
Ivermectin
At the moment we have two meta-analyses about Ivermectin who went through
competent peer review before getting published. With competent peer review I mean
review by people who are competent and familiar enough with the subject to spot
when control and placebo get exchanged in the reporting of one trial.
The two competently peer reviewed meta-analyses are published in Reviews in
Medical Virology and American Journal of Therapeutics who have impact factors of
4.221 and 1.955 which suggests that both normal journals and not obscure ones that
are willing to publish anything. Given that more prestigious journals are more likely to
publish wrong data, calling for meta analysis is good enough and it doesn't make
sense to require it to be published in more prestigious journals.
While the two meta-analyses conclude that there's moderate-certainty evidence for
ivermectin working, authorities like the FDA, CDC, WHO and EMA reject ivermectin as
a treatment.
As a doctor deciding how to treat a patient, the doctor has to make a decision what to
trust. While we can make theoretical arguments about whom we should trust, it's
essentially about the question in which authority you want to believe. There's no
empiric evidence for a heuristic that's proven to help us decide whom to trust. This is
bad because one side of the debate is likely right and given that some doctors follow
either side this means that a lot of patients get bad treatment.
Deciding about Ivermectin is about believing in heuristics of authorities

I could make an argument here for the decision making heuristics of one authority or
the other, but the argument I could make wouldn't be based on good empiric
evidence. This has the great advantage that even when people read my article in a
few years, I run no risk of being seen as having made the wrong call.
Instead, I argue that this case shows that medicine currently is essentially about
believing the heuristics of authorities without any evidence which heuristics are the
best. When people argue that they make a treatment decision because the CDC, FDA,
WHO or EMA holds a position, the decision essentially is about trust in authority.
Prediction-based Medicine
Once you accept that treatment decisions are about believing in authorities, the
logical conclusion is to ask how to determine which authority is better than another.
This is similar to the problem of determining which political analyst to trust. Philip
Tetlock found a way to evaluate the experts. To evaluate them he asked them to
predict political outcomes in the future. Modern statistics like the Briers scoring rule or
the Logarithmic scoring rule then allow us to evaluate the predictions.
The same process can be used in medicine to decide whom to trust. This can be done
at two levels. At one level we could ask individual scientists and institutions to predict
the outcome of clinical trials. We can also ask doctors to predict the outcomes of
individual patients.
While the ﬁrst is also valuable, I will focus here on the second. When dealing with a
pandemic of a new virus, in the beginning no trials are available about what the best
treatments are but there are still patients that need to be treated.
The FLCCC is a group of Intensive Care Unit (ICU) doctors who came up with treatment
guidelines that diﬀered from the oﬃcial guidelines. One way to evaluate whether to
trust them when Dr. Pierre Kory of the FLCCC gave his ﬁrst senate testimony in May
2020 would be to ask: "How good are you at predicting the outcomes for your COVID-
19 patients compared to ICU doctors who follow the standard protocol." If Dr. Pierre
Kory has a bad score at predicting outcomes for COVID-19 patients he should be
ignored. If he however advocates a diﬀerent treatment and is good at making
predictions that suggests that other ICU doctors are well advised to learn from him.
In a pandemic where good fast response to treat the ﬁrst wave of patients is very
important, this process allows expertise to travel much faster through the medical
community because it's easy for doctors to identify the people who understand
treating COVID-19 well and learn from them.
Outside of the pandemic we can give those doctors with the best prediction scores in
their ﬁeld seats at the table where the treatment guidelines are written because they
are the people who are best at synthesising all available evidence to make treatment
decisions for a particular disease.
Conclusion
We need to use the empiric method to ﬁnd out how to best interpret the available
evidence. Asking doctors to predict outcomes of their clinical cases is an empiric
method that allows for scoring their prediction, which gives us a good heuristic to
decide whom to trust.

 

