
What You Can and Can't Learn from Games
1. Features and Antifeatures

Features and Antifeatures
One interesting thing I've noticed in the ﬁeld of game design is that there are some
purported features that are so hated that not having them becomes an advertised
feature! Here are some quick examples:
In the world of card games, Magic: the Gathering's 'lands'/'mana' system for
accumulating resources is widely hated, and competitors to Magic at times
explicitly advertise "no mana ﬂood! no mana screw!" (For those unfamiliar with
Magic, this is a situation where randomness in the game's resource system can
essentially decide the game without the players making very meaningful
decisions.)
In digital games, I've seen "no pay-to-win" used as a selling point to diﬀerentiate
from games where players can directly buy things that increase their in-game
power.
An even more extreme example of "no pay-to-win" is "no NFTs" -- NFTs have a
very bad reputation in the gaming world, to the point where not having them is
advertised sometimes even when one doesn't much have reason to think the
game would have NFTs.
I like the word 'antifeatures' for these sorts of things -- and while the existence of
'antifeatures' ﬁrst came to my attention in the domain of game design, I think this sort
of thing is prevalent in a lot of other places as well. For example, some bars will
advertise "no cover charge", some comedy shows will advertise "no drink minimum",
and so on.
However, I think there's another important aspect to this that concept some people
miss. Just avoiding things that people don't like doesn't make your game good! It's
cool that your game has no mana screw or mana ﬂood, that it isn't pay-to-win, and
that it doesn't have NFTs -- but in order for me to be interested in it, it has to go
beyond merely not having bad things and instead has to actively have things to
recommend it!
In other words, I'm talking to my friends about a game and trying to get them to play
it, I think I generally need more to go on than "it doesn't have <unpopular feature X>"
-- there have to be other things that make it actively appealing!
One potentially relevant example is that there are a bunch of conservative ﬁlms that
have "this ﬁlm isn't 'woke' like what Hollywood puts out!" or whatever as a primary
selling point. Unfortunately, to be really successful you also have to... actually make a
good ﬁlm? "Not being <undesirable thing X>" seems generally insuﬃcient.

